MEASURING SPACE: ACCURACY AND 2D GEOMETRY
1.1 Measurements and estimates
Investigation 1
A Measuring a potato
1 Make a list of all the physical properties of a potato. Which of these 
properties can you measure? How could you measure them? Are 
there any properties that you cannot measure? How do we determine 
what we can measure?
2 ■i iHt'MB What does it mean to measure a property of an object? 
How do we measure?
3
4
Factual
Which properties of an object can we measure?
Why do we use measurements and how do we use 
measuring to define properties of an object?
B Measuring length
5 
Estimate the length of the potato.
6 
Measure the length of the potato. How accurate do you think your 
measurement is?
C Measuring surface area
Recall that the area that encloses a 3D object is called the surface area.
? Estimate the surface area of the potato and write down your estimate.
Use a piece of aluminium foil to wrap the potato and keep any overlapped 
areas to a minimum. Once the potato is entirely wrapped without any 
overlaps, unwrap the foil and place it over grid paper with 1 cm2 units, trace 
around it and count the number of units that it covers.
8 
Record your measurement. How accurate do you think it is?
9 
Measure your potato again, this time using sheets of grid paper with 
units of 0.5 cm2 and 0.25 cm2. Again, superimpose the aluminium foil 
representing the surface area of your potato on each of the grids, trace 
around it on each sheet of grid paper, and estimate the surface area.
10
11
Compare yourthree measurements. What can you conclude?
Factual
How accurate are your measurements? Could the use of 
different units affect your measurement?
D Measuringvolume
You will measure the volume of a potato, which has an irregular shape, 
by using a technique that was used by the Ancient Greek mathematician 
Archimedes, called displacement. The potato is to be submerged in water and 
you will measure the distance the water level is raised.
12 
Estimate the volume of the potato.
13 
What units are you using to measure the volume of water? Can you 
use this unit to measure the volume of a solid?
International 
mindedness
Where did numbers 
come from?
Note the height of the water in the beaker before you insert the potato. Slowly 
and carefully place the potato in the water, and again note the height of the 
water. Determine the difference in water level.
4

1.1
o
14
15
Record your measurement forthe volume of the potato.
If you used a beaker with smaller units, do you think 
that you would have a different measurement forthe volume?
E Measuringweight
16 Estimate the weight of the potato and write down your estimate.
1? Use a balance scale to measure the weight of the potato. Which units 
will you use?
18 WBffTWfTl Could the use of different units affect your measurement?
F Compare results
19 
Compare your potato measurements with the measurements of 
another group. How would you decide which potato is larger? What 
measures can you use to decide?
20 
How do we describe the properties of an object?
Measurements help us compare objects and understand how they relate to 
each other.
Measuring requires approximating. If a smaller measuring unit is chosen then 
a more accurate measurement can be obtained.
When you measure, you first select a property of the object that you will 
measure. Then you choose an appropriate unit of measurement for that 
property. And finally, you determine the number of units.
Investigation 2
Margaret Hamilton worked for NASA as the lead developer for Apollo 
flight software. The photo here shows her in 1969, standing next 
to the books of navigation software code that she and her team 
produced for the Apollo mission that first sent humans to the Moon. 
1 Estimate the height of the books of code stacked together, as 
shown in the image. What assumptions are you making?
2 Estimate the number of pages of code for the Apollo 
mission. How would you go about making this estimate? 
What assumptions are you making?
Factual
________  What is an estimate? What is estimation? How would
you go about estimating? How can comparing measures help 
you estimate?
4 EHE320J Why are estimations useful?
5
Geometry and
Number and algebra 
trigonometry

MEASURING SPACE: ACCURACY AND 2D GEOMETRY
Estimation (or estimating) is finding an approximation as close as possible 
to the value of a measurement by sensible guessing. Often the estimate is 
used to check whether a calculation makes sense, or to avoid complicated 
calculations.
\
Estimation is often done by comparing the attribute that is measured to 
another one, or by sampling.
Did you know?
The idea of comparing and estimating goes way back. Some of the early 
methods of measurement are still in use today, and they require very little 
equipment!
The logger method
Loggers often estimate tree heights 
by using simple objects, such as a 
pencil. An assistant stands at the base 
of the tree, and the logger moves a 
distance away from the tree and holds 
the pencil at arm’s length, so that it 
matches the height of the assistant.
The logger can then estimate the 
height of the tree in “pencil lengths” 
and multiply the estimate by the 
assistant's height.
The Native American method
Native Americans had a very unusual way of estimating the height of a tree. They would 
bend over and look through their legs!
This method is based on a simple reason: for a fit adult, the angle that is formed as 
they look through their legs is approximately 45 degrees. Can you explain how this 
method works?
6

