DIVIDING UP SPACE: COORDINATE GEOMETRY, LINES, VORONOI DIAGRAMS
4.5 Voronoi diagrams and the toxic 
waste dump problem
There are five airports in a state, represented by dots 
on the diagram. The coloured regions on the diagram 
indicate the points which are closest to a given airport. 
For example, Airport 5 is the closest one to all points 
in the purple region, and Airport 2 is the closest one 
to the points that are in the green region. What do 
you think this diagram can be used for? What kinds of 
questions can it help answer?
This is an example of a Voronoi diagram, named after the 
mathematician Georgy Voronoy (1868-1908). Voronoi 
diagrams have a large number of applications nowadays, such as in 
science, technology and visual art.
Reflect
What does a Voronoi diagram show?
; \ 
The regions that include the closest points to a given point are called 
cells, and the given points are called sites. The diagram above shows five 
sites—the five airports—and five cells—the five coloured regions. The lines 
separating the regions are called boundaries or edges.
Investigation 13
Three hospitals A, B and C lie inside a square of side length 
10 units, which marks the boundaries of the town. The sides 
of the square are formed by the lines a := Q,x = 10 ,y= 0 
andy= 10.
Use technology or graph paper to complete the investigation.
1 On a coordinate system, draw the lines with equations.x= 0, 
x= 10,y = 0 and y= 10 to mark the boundaries of the town.
Hospitals A and B have coordinates (1, 8) and (8, 8).
2 Locate them on the coordinate system and label them with 
A and B.
3 Locate the midpoint of [ AB | and label it with M1. Draw 
the perpendicular bisector of [AB].
4 Hospital C has coordinates (3,2). Locate the midpoint of 
[AC] and label it with M2. Draw the perpendicular bisector 
for A and C of [AC].
A
B
c
123456789 10
Hospitals A, B and C located within the 
town's boundaries
5 Locate the midpoint of [BC] and label it with M3. Draw the perpendicular bisector of [BC].
6 Would the perpendicular bisector of [AB] intersect the perpendicular bisector of [AC]? Explain why or why not.
Would the perpendicular bisector of [ AB ] intersect the perpendicular bisector of [BC] ? Explain why or why not 
Would the perpendicular bisector of [AC] intersect the perpendicular bisector of [BC] ? Explain why or why not. 
Would all three perpendicular bisectors intersect in one point or not? Explain. 
I
190

? Where would the boundaries of the Voronoi diagram be?
8 ffTTiffWfffTl What does the boundary of a Voronoi diagram represent?
9 Use the pentagon tool to shade in a different colour each region separated by the Voronoi diagram 
boundaries.
10 Which point is equally distant from the three hospitals A, B and C? Is there more than one such point?
11 Samar’s house is located at point (4,5). Determine which hospital is closest to her house.
12 ffffiTWCTfTl What does the Voronoi diagram show?
13 CBHyWfTl Why is a vertex always equidistant from three sites?
14 HAWAII Ml How many edges meet at a vertex of a Voronoi diagram?
TOK
John Snow used 
Voronoi diagrams 
to show that the 
Broad Street cholera 
outbreak that killed 
816 people in London 
in 18S2-60 was due 
to contaminated water 
and not air.
\
The boundaries of the cells in a Voronoi diagram are formed by the perpendic 
ular bisectors of the line segments joining the sites. Usually all other lines 
that do not form boundaries to the cells are erased when the construction of 
the diagram is complete.
; \
A point at which cell boundaries meet in a Voronoi diagram is called a vertex.
A vertex is equidistant from the three surrounding sites.
Investigation 14
There are three fire stations, A, B and C, in a town. The coordinates of the fire 
stations are A( 1,4), B( 1,0) and C(4, 3).
In order to improve response times, the township has installed a new 
centralized fire response system, which allows a dispatchers send a fire 
truck from the nearest fire station to the location of the fire. How should the 
township be divided into regions so that there is one fire station in each region 
and this fire station is the closest one to each house in the region?
Use technology or graph paper to complete the investigation.
1 
Plot the fire stations A and B on coordinate axes, either by hand or using a 
software package.
2 
Draw the perpendicular bisector of [ AB | and gently shade those points 
nearest to A. How would you divide the township into two regions if fire 
station C is not yet in operation?
3 
Add fire station C to the diagram, then find the equations of the 
perpendicular bisectors of [AC] and [BC] and add these to the diagram. 
How would you divide the township into three sections when the three fire 
stations A, B and C are fully operational?
4 The township is relocating fire station D within its territory. Station D will 
have location (5,1). Divide the township into four regions for the four fire 
stations A, B, C and D.
TSS
Many software packages 
allow you to draw and 
obtain the equations 
of perpendicular 
bisectors directly. If 
not using software, a 
perpendicular bisector 
can be constructed 
using a compass and 
a ruler or by finding its 
equation and sketching it.
EXAM HINT
In an exam you will 
not be asked to draw a 
perpendicular bisector 
unless you already 
have its equation.
5 
Why does adding the fire stations one by one make sense for creating a 
town map?
6 
What is the incremental algorithm?
191
Geometry and 
Functions 
trigonometry

DIVIDING UP SPACE: COORDINATE GEOMETRY, LINES, VORONOI DIAGRAMS
It can be difficult to draw 
all the perpendicular 
bisectors at the same time 
and then create a Voronoi 
diagram, especially if the 
number of sites is more 
than three. The diagram 
shows that even with just 
four points (sites) there 
are difficulties in deciding 
which perpendicular 
x bisectors to use to form 
boundaries of the cells.
The incremental algorithm described below avoids this problem by 
adding each of the sites one at a time.
Incremental algorithm for constructing Voronoi
diagrams
Method
1 Plot the points A and B on coordinate axes, either by hand or using 
a software package. Draw the perpendicular bisector of line segment 
[AB] and gently shade the region of points nearest to A.
2 Add point C to the diagram, then find the equations of the 
perpendicular bisectors of [AC] and [BC] and add these to the 
diagram.
3 The incremental algorithm:
I Begin with the perpendicular bisector which lies between the 
new site C and the site in whose cell this vertex currently lies.
ii Move along this line until you reach an intersection with 
another of the perpendicular bisectors between the new site and 
an existing one. (This will also be on a boundary of the previous 
Voronoi diagram.)
iii Leave the intersection along this other perpendicular bisector in 
the direction that lies entirely in the cell surrounding another 
of the sites. (This will be the direction that creates a convex 
polygon around the new site.)
iv The algorithm stops either when you return to your starting point 
(if the cell is bounded) or if there are no more intersections (if 
the cell is unbounded). In this case you may need to reverse the 
direction of the algorithm to ensure all sides have been found.
4 Shade the three regions making up the new Voronoi diagram.
5 Having completed the diagram for the three sites A, B and C, you 
can now add the next site, D. Repeat steps 2 and 3. This time there 
will be two intersection points with the perpendicular bisectors of 
[BD] and [AD].
TOK
Is mathematics 
independent of culture?
TS7
Usually a final 
version of the Voronoi 
diagram will have 
the perpendicular 
bisectors removed so 
that only the edges of 
the regions remain.
192

4.5
Reflect
What is the incremental algorithm?
In these questions, unless told to calculate 
the equations of the perpendicular bisectors, 
you can construct the lines with a pair of 
compasses, by eye or by using software.
1 By finding the perpendicular bisectors 
between each pair of points, use the 
incremental algorithm to complete the 
Voronoi diagrams for the given sites.
a (1,1), (3,1), (2,3) 
b (1.1), (3,1), (3,5)
2 A neighbourhood has three bookstores 
located at A( 1,1), B(5,1) and C(5, 5).
a Construct the Voronoi diagram for the 
three bookstores A, B and C either by 
hand or using a software package, 
b Determine the closest bookstore to Kari, 
whose house is located at (1,4).
A fourth bookstore was built recently at 
point D(3, 5).
c Construct the Voronoi diagram for the 
four bookstores A, B, C and D either by 
hand or using a software package, 
d Determine whether there is another 
bookstore that is now closest to Kari's 
house. If so, determine which one.
The toxic waste dump problem
This problem is to find the point on the Voronoi diagram that is as far 
as possible from any of the sites. It is called the toxic waste dump 
problem because one application might be to find where waste can be 
deposited so that it is as far as possible from habitation.
Investigation 15
Toxic waste is to be deposited between three towns A, B and C.
Find the point that is the farthest from all three towns.
1 On a copy of the Voronoi diagram draw a circle that will pass 
through points A, E and D. Identify the centre of this circle.
2 Draw another circle through points A, B and E. Identify the 
centre of this circle.
3 Draw a third circle through points A, B and C. Identify the 
centre of this circle.
4 Write down what you notice.
5 Explain using the diagram below why there will always be three points 
(sites) equidistant from a vertex of a Voronoi diagram which has three 
edges incident to it.
6 Explain why the circle with V3 as a centre which passes through A will 
also passthrough B and C.
7 Determine the radius of each of the three circles from parts 1,2 and 3. 
Identify the circle with the largest radius.
8 Determine the location of the toxic waste deposit so that it is farthest from 
the surrounding towns A, B, C, D and E.
o
Continued on next page
193
Geometry and 
Functions 
trigonometry

DIVIDING UP SPACE: COORDINATE GEOMETRY, LINES, VORONOI DIAGRAMS
9 Explain why another site [town] cannot be inside the largest circle, assuming that no new sites are 
added.
10 
Where is the point that gives the solution to the toxic waste problem?
11 BTTHOTfTl What applications are there for the solutions of the toxic waste problem?
12 
Why are vertices of a Voronoi diagram the only points that give the solution to the toxic 
waste problem (assuming a location between the towns is sought)?
EXAM HINT
Within a Voronoi diagram the solution to the toxic waste problem will be at an 
intersection of cell boundaries or on the boundary of the diagram. In exams the 
solution will always be one of the internal vertices rather than a boundary edge.
Example 31
A town has four coffee shops. An entrepreneur wishes to open a new shop in the 
town but would like it to be as far as possible from all the other four coffee shops. 
Where should he put it?
Consider the Voronoi diagram below showing the positions of the four coffee shops on a set 
of coordinate axes: A(l,6), B(2,2), C(8,2) and 0(8,5), where one unit represents 1 km.
a Find the coordinates of the vertices P and 
Q in the Voronoi diagram, 
b Determine where a fifth shop should 
be sited so as to be as far as possible 
from any other shop, and how far this 
will be.
a P is the point where x = 5 and y = 3.5 
meet: (4, 3.5)
The perpendicular bisector of |AB| 
is -x + 4y= 14.5.
Three perpendicular bisectors meet at each 
of the vertices. Finding the intersection of 
any two perpendicular bisectors will be 
sufficient to find the vertex.
Any two of these equations need to be 
calculated by finding the midpoint and 
gradient.
194

o
The perpendicular bisector of [AD] is 
Ix-y = 26.
The perpendicular bisector of [BD] is 
2x + y= 13.5.
The coordinates of Q are (4.39, 4.72).
b Centred at P: PD = J(5-3.5)1 2+(8-5)2 
= 3.35
Centred at Q:
QA = yj( 6-4.72)' +(4.39-l)2 = 3.62
The new coffee shop should therefore be 
built at point Q.
The coordinates can then be found 
algebraically or by using a GDC.
The solution will be at whichever of the 
points P and Q is farthest from the three 
sites nearest to them.
Only one length for each vertex needs to 
be checked as the other two sites will be an 
equal distance from the vertex.
Reflect
How do you find the distance from a site to a
vertex?
Where is the point that gives the solution to the toxic waste 
problem?
How do you find the point that gives the solution to the toxic 
waste problem?
International-mindedness
Which do you think is superior: the Bourbaki 
group analytical approach or the Mandelbrot 
visual approach to mathematics?
1 In a town three schools A, B and C are 
located at the points with coordinates 
A(l,3), B(6,4) and C(6,1).
It is decided that a new school should be 
built as close as possible to a point which is 
farthest from all three existing schools.
a Explain why this point will be at the 
intersection of the perpendicular bisectors 
of line segments [AB], [BC] and [AC], 
b Find the equations of the perpendicular 
bisectors of line segments [AB] and [BC]. 
c Hence find the coordinates of the point 
where the new school should be built, 
d Determine how far the new school will 
be from each of the other schools.
At a fair there are three hamburger stands,
A, B and C. The fairground is in the shape 
of a rectangle with dimensions 100 m by 
50m. The bottom-left comer of the field 
can be regarded as the origin of a coordinate 
system, with the diagonally opposite corner 
as (100, 50). The hamburger stands are at 
the points A(20, 30), B(80, 30) and C(40,10).
a Find the equations of the perpendicular 
bisectors of:
i A and C 
ii B and C.
People will always go to the hamburger 
stand that is closest to them.
b Draw the Voronoi diagram that 
represents this situation.
195
Geometry and 
Functions 
trigonometry

DIVIDING UP SPACE: COORDINATE GEOMETRY, LINES, VORONOI DIAGRAMS
c Find the region of the fairground which 
is closest to:
i stand C 
ii stand A.
d A fourth hamburger stand is to be added 
to the fairground at a point as far as 
possible from the other three stands.
i State the coordinates of the position at 
which it should be built.
ii Determine how far the new stand will 
be from the other hamburger stands.
3 A town can be considered as a rectangle 
which runs 10 km east to west and 8 km 
north to south. A coordinate grid is placed 
on a map of the town with the origin in 
the south-west corner. There are four 
schools in the town, A, B, C and D, whose 
coordinates are A(2, 5), B(3, 3), C(8,6) and 
D(8, 1).
Children go to the school that is closest 
to their home when measured in a direct 
line.
An estate agent wishes to construct a 
diagram that shows in which school's 
catchment area a house lies.
a Find the perpendicular bisector of [AB].
b Show the positions of A and B and their 
perpendicular bisector on a diagram of 
the town.
The perpendicular bisectors of [AC] and 
[BC] are y = -6x + 35.3 and y =
3 
3
c Construct the Voronoi diagram, using 
the incremental algorithm, for the three 
schools A, B and C.
d i Find the perpendicular bisectors of
[BD) and [CD] and show these on the 
diagram.
ii Complete the diagram required by the 
estate agent.
e Find the coordinates of the two vertices 
where three edges meet.
f A fifth school is to be built in the town as 
far as possible from the other schools. Give 
the coordinates of the point at which 
it should be built if it was to meet this 
requirement.
g On the diagram already drawn, add the 
fifth school at the position found in part f 
and sketch the new Voronoi diagram. 
There is no need to find equations for the 
new perpendicular bisectors.
Chapter summary
In two-dimensional (2D) space, the midpoint, jM, 
of the line segment joining points
Afx^y,) and B(x,,y,) is M
• In three-dimensional (3D) space, the location of any point A is 
determined by an ordered triple of coordinates (x, y, z), where 
each coordinate determines the location along the x-,y- and z-axis 
respectively.
• In 3D space, the midpoint, M, of the line segment joining points 
A(xl,yl,zl) andB(*2,y2,z2) is
(x{+x2 y,+y2 z.+z^
l 2 ' 2 ' 2 /
• In 2D, the distance between two points A(x1,y]) and B(xvy2) is
d = y]{x2-x, ):+(y2-y, )2.
• In 3D, the distance between two points A (xl,yl,Zl) and 
B(x2,yrz2) is AB = J(*2 - )2 + (y2 - y, )2 + (z2 ~ )" •
Developing 
your toolkit
Now do the 
Modelling and 
investigation 
activity on page 
202.
196

• The gradient of a line is a measure of the steepness of the line. The 
bigger the gradient, the steeper the line. It is also known as the slope. 
Usually, the gradient (slope) of a line is denoted by the letter m.
B(x2,y2)
z' 
i
i
i
•i,
"2
A (xlty,)
• m = ———
• When the line goes upward towards the right the gradient is a 
positive number.
• When the line goes downward towards the right the gradient is a 
negative number.
• Zero gradient: When a line is horizontal its gradient is zero.
• Undefined gradient: When a line is vertical it does not have a defined 
gradient.
• The gradient of a line describes its steepness and direction.
• Equations of lines given in point-gradient form or general form can be 
rearranged in the form below, which is called the gradient-intercept form:
y=mx+k, where m is the gradient and k is the value ofyforx=0.
• The shortest distance from a point A to a straight line (BC) is 
the length of the line segment [AD], where D lies on (AB) and 
[AD]_L(AB).
• In a Voronoi diagram, the regions which include the closest points to a 
given point are called cells, and the given points are called sites. The 
lines separating the regions are called boundaries or edges.
• The boundaries of the cells in a Voronoi diagram are formed by the 
perpendicular bisectors of the line segments joining the sites. Usually 
all other lines that do not form boundaries of the cells are erased 
when the construction of the diagram is complete.
• A point at which cell boundaries meet in a Voronoi diagram is called a 
vertex. A vertex is equidistant from the three surrounding sites.
Developing inquiry skills
Look again at the problem at the beginning of the chapter. Can you use 
your knowledge of perpendicular bisectors and Voronoi diagrams to 
divide the territory into three regions so that each region contains all 
points that are closest to one island?
Can you now find the areas of these regions? You can use technology. 
Is such an area allocation fair?
19?
Geometry and 
Functions 
trigonometry

DIVIDING UP SPACE: COORDINATE GEOMETRY, LINES, VORONOI DIAGRAMS
Chapter review
1 Rewrite the following equations in point- 
gradient form:
a -x + y = 2 b y-3 = -2(x-8)
c 2x + 4 y = -~
3
2 Find the points of intersection of the lines 
with equations:
a y = -~x-7 and y = -5x4 10 
b y - 1 = -{x- 4) and y = 0 
c -x+ 3y = -2 and --^x-y = 2.
3 Determine what kind of quadrilateral is 
formed by the following points:
M(-2,-l), L(1,3),T(5,0) and H(2,-4).
4 Three lines with equations y = -x + 3,
1 
21 
, 
5 
1.
y = -x---- and y = -x— intersect at
8 
8 6 
2
three points and form a triangle. Find: 
a the coordinates of these three points 
b the lengths of the sides of the triangle 
c the perimeter of the triangle.
5 Line [OB], shown in the diagram, 
represents Petya's walk to work.
a Find the number of km that Petya 
walks in 1 hour.
b Maria also walks to work. She walks 
5 km in 1.6 hours.
Determine who walks faster. Assume 
they each walk at a constant rate. 
Justify your conclusion, 
c Write down equations of the lines 
describing Petya's and Maria's walks.
l
Find the equation of a line parallel to:
a the line y = -—x + 5 and passing 
4
through (0,0)
b the line 0.5x - 3y = 8 and passing 
through (-3, -1).
6-
4 -
o .
o
o .
1 -
1 0
__ ;
2
E
i
3 7
c Line with equation -20x + 55y = 22
(--------------------
Click here for a mixed
review exercise
V_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
6 A student has graphed some equations 
incorrectly. Determine which equations 
have been incorrectly graphed, the error 
in graphing and the equations of the lines 
that have been graphed instead.
Draw the graph of the correct line if there 
is an error.
a Line with equation y - 5x - 3
E
—
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7
Lime (hours)
198

4
8 Find the equation of a line perpendicular to: 
a the line x + 3y = 0 and passing through
point (-3,2)
b the line y = -3x +0.75 and passing 
through (1,1.5).
9 Three farmhouses are to be powered by 
wind. The farms are located at A(60,20), 
B(220,120) and 0(240,40), where the 
coordinates are in metres. A wind turbine 
is to be placed at the point equidistant 
from the farms A, B and C. Find:
a i the equation of the line (AB)
ii the midpoint of line segment [AB]
iii the equation of the perpendicular 
bisector of line segment [AB]
b i the equation of the line (AC)
ii the midpoint of line segment [AC]
iii the equation of the perpendicular 
bisector of line segment [AC]
c i the equation of the line (BC)
ii the midpoint of line segment | BC ]
iii the equation of the perpendicular 
bisector of line segment |BC).
d Determine the coordinates of the point 
T that is equidistant from the farms A,
B and C.
The blade of a wind turbine is 25 m long. 
Current regulations require that the distance 
between the turbine and a house be at least 
three times the length of the blade.
e Determine whether the wind
turbine meets current regulations for 
installation at point T.
f Determine the area that one wind 
turbine needs to function. Give your 
answer to the nearest integer.
10 The map of a rectangular province is 
shown with the positions of four landing 
platforms for helicopters. The points A,
B, C and D, which represent the landing 
platforms, are placed on a coordinate 
grid centred at one of the corners of the 
province. (Each unit along a coordinate 
axis is 100 miles.)
Emergency medical teams are flown to 
any point in the province as needed.
When an emergency occurs, the medical 
team that is based closest to the location of 
the emergency will fly out to the location.
a Construct a Voronoi diagram for the 
four sites A, B, C and D.
A neighbouring province asks whether 
the medical team based at point B(2,6) 
can also help out in their province. The 
director replies that it would be possible 
if the team is currently covering a smaller 
area than at least two of the other medical 
teams.
b Find where the perpendicular bisector 
of [AD] meets the line y - 4.
c Find the area of the cells surrounding:
i A ii B iii C iv D.
Hence stale whether or not the medical 
team based at A will be able to support 
the other province.
Exam-style questions
11 PI: The point M is the midpoint of points
A and B. If A (4, -6,10) and M (7, 3, -5), 
find the coordinates of the point B.
(5 marks)
12 PI: The line L has equation y = 3x - 5.
For the lines given below, state with 
reasons whether they are parallel to L, 
perpendicular to L, or neither. (6 marks)
i y = ^x-l 
ii -6x+2y + 8 = 0
v x + 3y + 9 = 0
199
Geometry and 
Functions 
trigonometry

DIVIDING UP SPACE: COORDINATE GEOMETRY, LINES, VORONOI DIAGRAMS
13 PI: The coordinates of point P are (-3, 8)
and the coordinates of point Q are 
(5, 3). M is the midpoint of |PQ]. 
a Find the coordinates of M. (2 marks) 
Lj is the line which passes through P 
and Q.
b Find the gradient of Ly (2 marks)
The line L7 is perpendicular to L and 
passes through M.
c i Write down the gradient of Lv 
ii Write down, in the form y = mx + c, 
the equation of Lr 
(3 marks)
14 PI: A ski resort is designing two new ski 
h lifts. One lilt connects station B at the
base of a mountain and station P at the 
top of a ski run. The other lift connects 
station P with station Q, which is at the 
top of another ski run.
The three stations are placed on a 
three-dimensional coordinate system 
(measured in metres). The coordinates 
of the stations are B = (0,0,0), P = (500, 
400, 300) and Q = (900,600,700).
A skier wishes to reach the top of the 
run located at P from the base of the 
mountain.
a Determine the distance covered by 
the skier on the ski lift from the base 
of the mountain to P. (2 marks) 
In order for a skier to reach the top of 
the ski run at Q they must take the lift 
from the base of the mountain to P, and 
then take a separate lift from P to Q.
b Determine the total distance covered 
by a skier on the ski lifts from the 
base of the mountain to Q. (3 marks)
15 PI: The swimming pool at West Park
h  
contains 500 000 litres of water when it
is full. The pool can be drained of water 
at a constant rate of 50 000 litres per 
hour.
a Write an equation for the volume 
(V litres) of water remaining in the 
pool t hours since draining began.
(1 mark)
At 8:00am the pool is full of water and 
the drain is opened.
b Determine the time when the pool is 
25% full of water. 
(3 marks)
The swimming pool at East Park 
contains 800000 litres of water when 
it is full, and can be drained at a rate 
of 100000 litres per hour. At 8:00am 
(when the drain is opened at West Park 
pool), the drain is also opened at the 
East park pool.
c Calculate the time when the pool at 
West Park contains the same amount 
of water as the pool at East Park.
Find also the volume of water in 
each pool at this time. (4 marks) 
16 PI: Lines L and Ly are given by the 
equations L}:ax—3y = 9 and 
2
L * y = -x + 4.
2 
3
The two lines are perpendicular, 
a Find the value of a. 
(3 marks)
b Hence, determine the coordinates of 
the intersection point of the lines.
(2 marks)
1? P2:The cuboid ABCOFPDE has vertices 
h with coordinates shown in the diagram.
z
a Find the surface area of the cuboid.
(2 marks)
b Find the length of the diagonal [BE].
(2 marks)
Diagonals [AD] and [BE] intersect at 
the point M.
c i Find the coordinates of M.
ii Find AMB. 
(7 marks)
200

18 PI: A Canadian bank charges its customers 
h a fixed commission fee of $ a Canadian 
dollars (CAD) if they wish to exchange 
CAD into euros (€).
The bank then uses the exchange rate 
$l:€r to convert the remaining amount.
Michael converts 1200 CAD and 
receives €765 from the bank.
Janet exchanges 500 CAD and receives 
€315 from the same bank.
a Find the values of i a ii r.
(6 marks)
b If Michael and Janet had put their 
Canadian dollars together first 
and then exchanged it all in one 
transaction, calculate the amount in 
euros, to the nearest cent, that they 
would have received. (2 marks) 
19 PI: A new airport, S, is to be constructed 
Zm at some point along a straight road, R, 
such that its distance from a nearby 
town, T, is the shortest possible.
The town, T, and the road, R, are 
placed on a coordinate system where 
T has coordinates (80,140) and R has 
equation y = x - 80. All coordinates are 
given in kilometres.
a Determine the coordinates of S, the 
new airport. 
(6 marks)
b Find the distance between the town 
and the new airport. 
(2 marks)
20 P2: Four mathematicians live on the bottom 
h floor of a circular tower of radius 10 m. 
They sit 5 m from the centre of the 
circle equally spaced around it as shown 
in the diagram.
Each mathematician scatters papers, 
with equations written on them, on the 
floor around them but always ensures 
that their papers are nearer to themself 
than to another mathematician.
a Copy the above diagram and sketch 
a Voronoi diagram on it, showing 
where each mathematician's papers 
can be situated. 
(2 marks)
b Calculate the area of the floor that 
each mathematician uses. (2 marks)
Another mathematician joins the group 
and sits at the centre of the circle. All 
of the other mathematicians rearrange 
their papers according to the same rule 
as before.
c Make another copy of the original 
diagram and sketch on it a new 
Voronoi diagram to represent the 
new situation. 
(4 marks)
d Find the area of floor that the fifth 
mathematician ends up using.
(2 marks)
e Calculate the area of floor that each 
of the original four mathematicians 
now uses. 
(2 marks)
f State how many points on the floor 
there are that are equidistant from 
any three mathematicians. (1 mark)
(-------------------
Click here for further
l^exam practice
201
Geometry and 
Functions 
trigonometry

Modelling and investigation activity
Real-life Voronoi
Approaches to learning: Thinking skills: 
Evaluating, Critiquing, Applying 
Exploration criteria: Presentation (A), 
Personal engagement (C), Use of mathe 
matics (E)
IB topic: Voronoi diagrams
Voronoi diagrams
In this chapter you have been introduced to Voronoi diagrams.
Voronoi diagrams have been used here to answer questions about distance and area:
1 Distance: finding points that are equidistant to several sites or a path that stays 
far away from sites, or determining where something can be located so that it is 
as far as possible from existing sites.
Which questions from the chapter could be listed in this group?
2 Area: considering the territories and regions of influence of animals or retail 
outlets or food places.
Which questions from the chapter could be listed in this group?
You can use Voronoi diagrams to answer similar questions that you generate 
yourself in explorations.
v_________________________________________________________________ >
202

Exploration
As part of your exploration you will need to provide an aim and a 
context for your choice of topic.
First write down all potentially interesting areas to consider for an 
exploration.
You are now going to try to create an exploration that you could use 
Voronoi diagrams to answer.
Consider the type of questions that are possible and combine this with 
something from your list of ideas.
Write the aim and context for your choice.
It may be helpful to think about how you would write the problem as a 
textbook question for someone else to answer.
Think about the following questions:
• Can you give a clear rationale for your choice of topic?
• Is the aim clearly stated?
• Do you have clearly articulated parameters for the problem?
• Is the aim manageable and completable within a sensible page limit and 
timeframe?
• Are you going to be able to find the relevant information?
You could now solve the problem you have created using the incremental 
algorithm introduced in this chapter.
Which method is best for answering your question given the available 
information and the form that this information is given in?
Could a computer software package (such as Geogebra) be used?
Or could the question be answered by hand using a compass and ruler for 
construction or by superimposing on a grid and using the equation of a 
perpendicular bisector?
Extension
Find out about "nearest neighbour interpolation".
This is an important application of Voronoi diagrams 
where the aim is to interpolate values of a function 
at points close to sites, given the value at those sites. 
This could be used, for example, to estimate or predict 
pollution or precipitation levels when you know the 
pollution or precipitation readings only at particular 
sites in a region.
203
Modelling and investigation activity

How long will it take a pump 
to fill a swimming pool?
All of these questions are about situations that 
can be represented by a mathematical model. 
These models will allow you to study relationships 
between the variables and to make predictions.
Conceptual lenses
■ Change
■ Modelling
Microconcepts
■ Function
■ Domain
■ Range
■ Graph of a function
■ Linear models and their parameters
■ Rate of change
■ Direct variation
■ Inverse function
■ Arithmetic sequence, arithmetic series
■ Common difference
■ General term
■ Sum of series
■ Simple interest
■ Prediction
■ Extrapolation
■ Interpolation
Modelling constant rates of 
change: linear functions
A rental car costs a fixed amount 
plus $f per kilometre. How can I find 
the maximum number of kilometres 
that can be driven with $A?
How much do you have to invest in your 
bank account to grow your savings so 
you can buy that yacht? And how much 
does the interest rate matter?
204

Stefan drives taxis part-time, usually driving between 10 
and 40 km per day. Currently, on each day that he drives 
he earns a fixed value of $20 plus $2.50 for every kilometre 
that the taxi's meter is on. Stefan wants to increase his 
annual profit so that it is equal to the annual average 
salary of $44 000. He is thinking of increasing the profit per 
kilometre by $0.30 per month for the next year.
What will his daily profit be if he drives 10, 20, 30 or 40 km?
How will his profits change if he increases the 
profit per kilometre by $0.30 after one month?
How can you model the daily profit for 
different values of profit per kilometre?
Will he reach the average annual salary in 
one year's time?
If not, how long will it take?
What assumptions do you need to make to 
answer this question?
Developing inquiry skills
Write down any similar inquiry questions you 
could ask and investigate for another business or 
charging structure. What information would you 
need to find?
Before you start
Think about the questions in this opening problem 
and answer any you can. As you work through the 
chapter, you will gain mathematical knowledge 
and skills that will help you to answer them all.
y
1
y=-x-2
2
You should know how to:
1 Solve linear equations and inequalities. 
6x>2x — 4
4x > -4 
(subtract 2x)
x>-\ 
(divide by 4)
3 Find the equation of a line from a graph.
fj m
flI
205

