11
MODELLING PERIODIC PHENOMENA: TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS
11.1 An introduction to periodic 
functions
Periodic functions help you to model 
a set of data in the special case 
where there is a repeating pattern of 
identical y-values. For example, the 
periodic functions shown to the right 
come from the study of electricity. The 
values of the pink function quantify 
power (watts) and the values of 
the green quantify current (amps).
The independent variable is time in 
milliseconds.
In the following investigation you will explore 
a physical structure that gives rise to a periodic 
function.
For example, a new Ferris wheel attraction is 
planned for Alphapark to carry passengers in pods. 
Safety laws require that the operators of the wheel 
must know the exact position of each pod: the 
extent to which it is above or below the x-axis and 
the extent to which it is to the right or left of the 
y-axis.
You will model this context physically, and then 
with mathematics.
TOK
Notice that the values of the functions repeat regularly. The entire 
graph is a series of congruent shapes, which form a continuous curve. 
The period of the function is the length of the shortest interval 
for which the function values when repeated give the entire graph. 
Hence the period of the power function is 1 millisecond and of the 
current 2 milliseconds, as shown in the diagram by the dashed lines. 
This means that the relationship between time and power repeats itself 
each millisecond, and the relationship between time 
and current repeats itself every 2 milliseconds.
Is there always a trade 
off between accuracy 
and simplicity?
Investigation 1
Part A: Construction of a spaghetti curve
You will need: spaghetti (or drinking straws), 
protractor, string, ball of colourful wool, 
scissors, glue and poster paper. Work in 
groups of two or three.
1 At one end of the paper, construct a circle 
on a set of axes with a radius of one 
spaghetti length.
o
500

11.1
2 
Use a protractorto measure and mark every 30° around the circle.
3 
To the right of the circle draw a graph with an x-axis that is about 6.5 spaghetti lengths long and a y-axis 
2 spaghetti lengths tall.
4 
Place the string around the circle with the end at 0°. Mark the 30° marks onto the string. Then put the 
string on the x-axis of the right-hand set of axes and transferee marks labelling every 30°.
5
6
Place a piece of spaghetti from the origin 
to the 30° mark on the circle. Take another 
piece of spaghetti and measure the vertical 
distance from the pod (P) to the .Y-axis. Cut 
the piece of spaghetti where it crosses the 
x-axis and glue this piece at 30° on the x-axis 
of the graph as shown. (Diagram not to scale.)
i
Now repeat for 30°, 60° and so on, until you
have gone completely around the circle to 360°. If the pod is above the x-axis of the circle, then place the 
spaghetti above the x-axis of the graph; otherwise place it below the x-axis.
7 Take the wool and glue it to the graph on your poster from zero degrees, along the top of the spaghetti 
pieces to form a smooth curve.
Part B: Reflection on the properties of your spaghetti curve
Your spaghetti curve is a periodic function. Write down its period.
What do the y-values of your spaghetti curve represent in the context of the Ferris wheel?
Factual
Factual
Factual I What are the maximum and minimum values of your curve and at what values of x do they 
occur? At what values of x is the value of your curve zero?
Graph the functionf(x) = sin x on your GDC. Compare and contrast your spaghetti curve with the curve 
shown on your GDC.
Represent the angle shown in the right-angled triangle formed by the 
pod, the origin and the intersection with the x-axis as 0and let the 
radius of the circle be 1.
5
6
Factual
Find the height of the pod above the x-axis in terms of 6.
Factual
For what values of 0 is your answer to 5 valid?
Now imagine the pod moving overthe y-axis so that 0 is greaterthan 
90° but less than 180°.
7 ifriHUhia Compare and contrast the position of the pod when 
0= 146° and when G= 34°.
What does this suggest about sin34° and sin 146°?
501
Functions

11
MODELLING PERIODIC PHENOMENA: TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS
8 
Apply the formula for the area of a triangle to the two triangles shown here. What does this 
prove for sin 34° and sin 146°?
9 ffWiTHCTffl How can you define the sine of an obtuse angle in terms of the sine of an acute 
angle?
Factual
When the pod is at position P, use geometry and 
trigonometry to find how far it is below the x-axis.
12 
How can you interpret the negative values of sin 0 when 0 is greater than 180° but less 
than 360° in the context of the Ferris wheel?
13 H.1.WJWW How can you extend the concept of the trigonometric ratio sin 0in a right-angled triangle 
to give all values of the periodic function/(x) = sin x?
You have discovered the properties of the periodic function f(x) = sin x. 
There are five other trigonometric ratios that are also periodic 
functions. In the next investigation you will explore one of these 
functions.
502

11.1
Investigation 2
Part A: Construction of a new spaghetti curve
You will make a new periodic graph. Follow the same steps as in Investigation 
1 part A, except this time measure the horizontal distance from the pod (P) to 
the y-axis. If the pod is to the right of the y-axis, assign a positive sign, if to the 
left of the y-axis, assign a negative sign.
Part B: Reflection on the properties of your new spaghetti curve
1 
Compare and contrast your function with that off(x) = sin x.
2 n.imuiMi Why should your new periodic function be periodic?
Now use your GDC to graphc](x) = cos A'and h(x) = tan x. Compare and 
contrast the graphs of these functions and your new spaghetti curve.
3
Factual I Which of#(x) = cos x and h(x) = tan x model your new 
spaghetti curve?
What are the maximum and minimum values of your curve and 
at what values of x do they occur? At what values of x is the value zero?
h .i.uj .uimi Why is your new spaghetti curve modelled so well by one 
of these functions but not the other?
6 lUoimuflEiB How can you define the cosine of an obtuse angle in terms 
of the cosine of an acute angle?
\
Definition: f(x) = sin xandg(x) = cos xare examples of sinusoidal functions.
You can use technology to solve simple trigonometric equations in a 
given domain and hence solve problems.
Example 1
Given that the radius of the Ferris wheel planned for Alphapark is 70 m and 
that 0 represents the angle measured anticlockwise from the x-axis, find all the 
angles for which the pod P is:
a a distance of 40 m vertically above the x-axis
b a distance of 20 m horizontally from the y-axis.
sin# = — can be graphed on the 
70
domain 0° < 0< 360°:
Sketching a labelled diagram is a good problem 
solving strategy.
The diagram shows that there are two possible 
positions of the pod that are 40 m above the 
x-axis.
The problem involves the vertical distance, hence 
sin is the right trigonometrical function to apply.
This fact is consistent with the given quantities 
in the right-angled triangle sketched: the 
hypotenuse and the side opposite to the angle.
Continued on next page
503
Functions

11
MODELLING PERIODIC PHENOMENA: TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS
-1.5
There are two values 0 for which the 
pod is 40 m above the x-axis: 34.8° and 
145° correct to three significant figures.
Make sure the viewing window shows the 
domain and the range of the function so that 
you can identify all solutions.
It is essential that you ensure your GDC is in 
degree mode at all times for both calculations 
and for graphing.
Find the intersections of the sine curve with 
the line y = 4/7 in order to find the solutions. 
Reflect that this solution is consistent with 
the diagram sketched at the start. The GDC 
rounded the angles to 3 sf, however, if the 
angles were given to 1 dp, the values would be 
34.8° and 143.2°, which add to 180° as required 
by the diagram.
A sketch shows there are four solutions to be 
found.
The problem involves the horizontal distance, 
hence cos is the right trigonometrical function to 
apply.
This fact is consistent with the given quantities 
in the right-angled triangle sketched: the 
hypotenuse and the side adjacent to the angle.
domain 0° < 0< 360°:
There are two values of 0 for which the 
pod is 20 m to the right of the y-axis: 
and 73.4° and 287° correct to three 
significant figures.
Altogether, there are four values of 
0 for which the pod is 20 m from the 
y-axis: 73.4°, 107°,253°and 287° 
correct to three significant figures.
Reflecting on the context of the problem helps 
you understand that more solutions can be 
found from the graph. When the pod is to 
the left of they-axis, the value of the cosine 
function is negative.
Only now is the solution consistent with the 
context of the problem.
504

