Introduction to business management 
Conceptual understandings 
* Change is essential for businesses to achieve their desired aims. 
* 
Creative business planning can lead to organizational success. 
* 
Ethical business behavior improves business image as well as customer loyalty. 
* 
Sustainable business practices can enhance a business existence. 
1.1 What is a business? 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* understand the nature of business 
» 
distinguish between primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary sectors 
* analyze the challenges and opportunities in starting up a business. 
These are questions based on themes within this unit that you could conduct some 
independent research about. You could explore: 
*  What is business activity? 
* What are the functional areas of a business? 
* 
 Whatis the role of innovation in promoting enterprise/entrepreneurship 
activities? 
¢ Why do businesses fail? 
* How does organizational structure shape behavior? 
* How does ethical behavior contribute to business sustainability? 
* How can corporate social responsibility (CSR) impact business creativity? 
*  Why could change cause conflict between stakeholders? 
* How might the use of new communications technologies encourage 
collaboration, communication and empowerment in the global workplace? 
The nature of business 
From the moment you wake up until you go back to sleep, you are constantly in 
contact with different businesses. When your alarm goes off, you probably have a look 
at your phone and check whether you have any messages. You are already interacting 
with a business — your telephone provider. When you get your breakfast ready, you 
interact with the businesses that produced the food you eat, the fluids you drink, or the 
power you use to heat up your breakfast. This continues all day. Understanding how 
you interact with different businesses will allow you to understand how important 
business is and how it works. 
Before we proceed, let's understand the difference between business as an activity and 
a business as an organization. 
What is business? 
Business is any activity to provide goods and services to consumers to make a profit.

« Figure1.1 Adiagram 
showing the nature of 
business: identifying inputs, 
following business processes, 
and creating outputs 
What is a business? 
A business is an entity or organization that produces goods and services. The 
organization adds value to resources to create products that meet the needs and wants 
of consumers. 
Businesses are often successful because they identify a need or want in the market 
that is not already being exploited by other businesses. 
Needs are human requirements that must be met for survival, and they are limited. 
Examples include food, warmth, shelter, clothing, and healthcare. 
Wants are human desires that are unlimited. They are not essential for survival, for 
example, entertainment, travel, gym memberships, etc. 
Figure 1.1 shows the nature of business. The nature of a business refers to its legal 
structures, business objectives, industry, resources, business processes, and products. 
Businesses transform inputs through different production processes to provide goods 
or services to fulfill the needs and wants of consumers. 
For example, a bakery business produces and sells products such as bagels, buns, rolls, 
biscuits, breads, cookies, cakes, etc. The bakery offers the product to meet the needs 
and wants of the households in its neighborhood. However, a business may find an 
innovative way of providing a product that is different to what current businesses are 
offering. The bakery may sell its products online to widen its customer base and grow 
its business. 
« Abakery provides bread, 
| which satisfies the basic need 
for food 
Are there laws of business 
in the same way that there 
are laws of nature? 
3

Introduction to business management 
Resources 
The resources used to produce goods and services are called inputs and can be 
categorized into four major types: 
* Capital refers to the manufactured goods needed to operate a business, such 
as machines, buildings, vehicles, and equipment. Capital goods need to be 
distinguished from consumer goods. Capital goods are used in production, while 
consumer goods are sold to the public to meet their needs and wants. 
* Land includes the raw materials and natural resources needed to produce goods 
and services. 
» Labor is the effort/work done by people. The quality of the work depends on their 
skills, knowledge, and experience. 
* Enterprise/entrepreneurship involves making a profit by identifying an 
opportunity, starting a company, arranging business deals and taking risks, and 
efficiently using the other three inputs (capital, land, and labor). Today's competitive 
business environment is based upon knowledge and learning. The companies that 
succeed are those that learn fast, use knowledge efficiently, and develop new insights. 
The quality of products depends on the quality of inputs. Disruption in the availability 
of resources can affect the entire production process, which can result in high costs 
and delays in the production of goods and services. 
Products 
Products are the output of 
a business activity. Products sold by businesses can be 
divided into two main categories: 
* Goods are physical products. 
+ Services are intangible products. These are the tasks performed by labor. 
A grocery shop sells goods (for example, bread, meat, pasta, oil, dairy, etc.), whereas 
other businesses provide services. 
A medical clinic is a service business, providing the service of medical care to its 
clients. Other service businesses include banks, taxi firms, law firms, and airlines. 
Many businesses provide both goods and services. For example, Apple sells goods 
(for example, Mac, iPhone, iPod, iPad) and provides services (for example, AppleCare, 
Apple Music, iCloud). 
Table 1.1 The differences between goods and services 
Goods 
Services 
Goods are physical products 
Services are not physical products 
Businesses producing goods have lower | Businesses providing services have 
customer contact 
higher customer contact 
Production of goods can require large 
Provision of services usually requires 
facilities 
small facilities 
Production of goods is capital intensive | Provision of services can be labor intensive 
Quality of goods produced can be easily | Quality of services provided is difficult to 
measured 
measure 

Based on the type of product, a business can be a manufacturing organization or 
a service organization. A manufacturing organization produces goods, whereas 
a service organization provides services. A business that provides goods and 
services is categorized as a manufacturing organization as well as a service 
organization. 
Identify the resources (inputs), business processes, and products (outputs) for the 
following businesses: 
* 
Retail clothing store 
»  Medical clinic 
* Automotive manufacturing company (for example, Tesla) 
 Transportation company (for example, Uber) 
* 
Beverage business (for example, Nestlé bottled water brands). 
Business process and functional areas 
A business process is any activity performed to add value to basic resources to produce 
the product. A business process converts inputs into goods and services to generate 
profit for the business. 
All businesses, regardless of size, have different functional areas that perform different 
business processes. 
These main functional areas and their roles are: 
« Human resources (HR) manages the labor and workforce. HR deals with the 
recruitment, compensation, and motivation of the workforce. The HR function 
ensures that people with appropriate skills are employed, trained, and rewarded 
suitably for their work. The role of the HR specialist or department is to hire, 
train, dismiss, and determine the appropriate compensation for employees. The 
specific HR objectives will be different in each business, as some businesses 
require a bigger or smaller intervention of this department depending on their 
nature. For example, the relevance of HR in a firm with just one employee will 
be very different to that in a firm with operations in different countries and 
thousands of employees. 
+ Finance and accounts manages the organization’s capital and assets. It deals 
with identifying, recording, and communicating the economic events and 
transactions of a business. The finance and accounts function is to ensure there 
are sufficient funds to produce the goods or services. To achieve this, the finance 
and accounts department oversees forecasting the financial requirements, 
keeping accurate records, procuring the necessary finance, and ensuring proper 
payments for goods and services. 
» Marketing is involved in understanding the needs and wants of consumers. The 
marketing function considers buyers’ needs and wants, and conducts research 
into where and how consumers will buy a product and how much they will be 
willing to pay for it. By identifying these factors, the marketing department makes 
sure the business produces goods and services that consumers are interested in 
buying. 

Figure 1.2 The four 
business sectors in the 
economy: primary, secondary, 
tertiary, and quaternary 
4 
Introduction to business management 
* Operations manages the activities involved in production of the product. 
The operations function oversees all the aspects of the production process. 
The operations department is responsible for the quality of materials, the 
production methods used, and the control of stock to ensure that production is 
uninterrupted. 
As we will see throughout this course, each of these areas is responsible for key 
activities that are essential for the organization to achieve its goals. All the functional 
areas work together to make the business successful. 
A business can gain a competitive advantage by strategically focusing on one or more 
functional areas. Functional area strategies are based on chosen competitive priorities 
such as cost, quality, delivery, flexibility, or innovation. For example, if a competitive 
priority is to be the lowest-cost producer, then a business will focus on operations, 
maximizing efficiency and reducing costs by implementing smart operation 
management systems. 
Business sectors 
Businesses are categorized into business sectors depending on the main activities they 
undertake. There are four major business sectors. Some businesses can operate in 
more than one sector. 
» Extracts and uses natural resources 
« Example: Forestry 
» Provides services 
« Example: Carpentry services, such as making 
or repairing furniture 
« Provides consultancy 
» Example: Social media marketing for furniture store 
« Produces goods from natural resources 
» Example: Furniture manufacturers and furniture stores 
Primary sector 
Businesses involved in primary sector activities extract and use natural resources 
to produce raw materials used by other businesses. These include businesses like

farming and mining. These businesses often employ a large amount of labor in 
developing economies (labor intensive), while in more developed economies, they 
make more use of machinery to extract the materials (capital intensive). The type 
of products produced by primary sector businesses have lower value added (the 
difference between the cost to extract the natural resource and the price at which it is 
sold). Natural resources or raw materials are sold, without any modifications, to other 
businesses or consumers. In the primary sector, there is not much difference between 
the cost and price of the product sold. 
< Figure1.3 
Fishingisan 
example of 
a primary sector 
business 
Secondary sector 
The secondary sector consists of businesses that manufacture goods using natural 
resources and raw materials provided by the primary sector. For example, a business 
that buys oranges from the primary sector and transforms them into bottled orange 
juice is a secondary sector business. 
These products have more value added as they have been transformed before being 
sold to customers. These customers might be local or international. Globalization has 
made it common to trade these goods with different parts of the world.

Figure 1.4 An orange juice > 
manufacturer is an example of 
a secondary sector business 
Introduction to business management 
Conceptual understanding: 
Ter‘tiary sector 
Ethics 
An ethical business is one that 
tries to minimize any negative 
impact on the environment, 
its workforce, and society. 
Ethical behavior can improve 
a business’ image as well as 
custorner loyalty. Using an 
online search engine, find 
some examples of ethical 
businesses. 
Figure 1.5 A bankisan 
example of a tertiary sector 
business 
A business that sells services to consumers or other businesses, such as a bank, 
transportation company, or insurance company, belongs to the tertiary sector. 
In developed economies, the tertiary sector is more significant because people 
specialize in the provision of services that have higher value added. 
The tertiary sector tends to employ a larger proportion of labor in developed 
economies than in developing economies. According to the International Labour 
Organization (ILO), in Europe, more than 60 per cent of the jobs created in 2021 
were created in the tertiary sector, while this figure falls to less than 35 per cent in 
Africa. 
> 

Quaternary sector 
The quaternary sector is composed of businesses that provide services like 
consultancy, research and development (R&D), information services, or technology 
services. This sector requires a highly educated workforce because these services 
require deep knowledge of the areas in which businesses operate. 
One example of the type of activity these businesses deal with is the creation of 
vaccines. This sector has experienced significant growth in recent years. 
Case study - Repsol 
Repsol is a global energy company that 
operates in more than one sector across 
different countries. 
The company extracts crude oil from the 
ground (primary sector) in places like South 
America and North America. 
It then processes the oil and transforms it into 
fuel (secondary sector) in operations fields like the Shaw field located in the United 
Kingdom’s North Sea. 
Finally, it sells the fuel in its own fuel stations (tertiary sector) in countries like Spain 
and Peru. 
1 Define the following terms: 
a. primary sector 
b. secondary sector 
c. tertiary sector 
2 Identify the key differences between different business sectors. 
Select a newspaper or magazine article that discusses an ethical business problem 
or issue. 
Reflect on the events and issues mentioned in the article. 
* How did the information in the article connect with what you already understood? 
* How did this extend your thinking? What new ideas or insights did it give you? 
* What questions did this raise for you? What was challenging, or what would 
you challenge, and why? 
Write a short essay on possible solutions to the ethical problem or issue. 
Challenges and opportunities in starting up 
a business 
Entrepreneurs have certain characteristics and skills that allow them to start a 
business. Entrepreneurs can be considered risk takers since they risk their capital and 
time to try to create goods or services that fulfill consumer wants and needs. 
The International Labour 
Organization (ILO} is the 
only tripartite UN agency. 
Since 1919, the ILO has 
been bringing together 
governments, employers, 
and workers of 187 
member countries to set 
labor standards, develop 
palicies, and devise 
programs promoting 
decent work for all people. 
Consider the following 
questions within the 
context of the ethics of 
business management: 
+ What is an ethical 
organization? 
+ Are ethical companies 
more likely to be 
profitable in the long 
term than unethical 
ones? 
- 'Span of control' is the 
number of people a 
rmanager is responsible 
for within a company. 
Do ethics have any role 
in deciding the optimal 
span of control for a 
business?

10 
Introduction to business management 
Entrepreneurs are proactive, and they take the initiative when required. In addition, 
entrepreneurs understand the market within which their business operates, and are 
committed and motivated to the business that they have set up. 
Nevertheless, when starting a business, entrepreneurs can face different challenges that 
can put their companies at risk. These are discussed below. 
Financial challenges 
When starting a business, entrepreneurs need money to invest in machinery, premises, 
and raw materials, and to pay for services, such as registering their company, or a 
phone line and internet connection, etc. 
This is the initial investment. Entrepreneurs also need to have the financial resources 
to cover these outgoings when the business starts operating. If the entrepreneurs hire 
people to work for them, they need to make sure they have enough money to pay the 
wages of their employees. 
Entrepreneurs may need to ask for loans from banks or financial institutions to get 
their business started. Loans can be very difficult to get when a business is new as there 
is no record of the business being able to pay back a loan. 
The entrepreneur may be required to provide the bank with collateral, usually 
property, that the bank will sell off 
if the business is not able to repay the loan. Once 
the business is running, the entrepreneur needs to make sure they have enough money 
to pay for the everyday expenses of the business. 
This means they need to know what needs to be paid and when, and forecast whether 
this will be something the business can pay with the money they get from selling their 
goods and services. If not, then the entrepreneur needs to ask banks for loans or credit 
to cover those expenses until they sell the goods or services. 
Marketing challenges 
One of the main challenges associated with marketing is the products or services 
themselves. Sometimes, a business offers a good or service that doesn’t meet the needs 
of consumers. 
Sometimes, the issue is with the price of the good or service, which might not be in 
line with the price set by competitors, making it less attractive for consumers. 
Another common challenge is product/brand awareness. Consumers might not 
be aware of the existence of the good or service and, as a result, do not consider 
it when deciding what to buy. Finally, another challenge is the location of the 
product. A product might not be available for the target consumer to buy in 
their area. 
Human resources challenges 
It might be difficult for a business to hire the right people to do the work. This could 
be caused by a lack of suitable candidates, or a lack of appropriate skills among 
the applicants. This can be a result of the economy being in an expansion cycle, 
so suitable people are already employed and not looking for a job. The working 
conditions and salary that a business offers might not be attractive enough, which 
makes it even more difficult for a business to find the right people.

Production balance 
Deciding the right level of production when a business starts is a significant challenge 
for entrepreneurs. If entrepreneurs are cautious and do not produce much, they might 
find that demand is higher than expected. This could lead to a shortage in supply, 
which might have a negative impact on the business’ image. 
On the other hand, if 
a business is too optimistic in its sales forecasts, this could 
generate an excess in supply, meaning the business has made an inefficient use of 
resources, particularly money, and might have to drastically reduce its prices to sell the 
available stock. This could have negative implications for its profits, making it difficult 
for the business to survive. 
External factors 
The success of 
a business not only depends on what the business does, but it also 
depends on many factors it cannot control. These factors are known as external or 
exogenous influences. Examples include natural disasters, the economic situation of 
a 
country or region, or a pandemic. 
An earthquake or flooding represents a challenge for a business located in the area 
where the natural disaster took place, because it has to struggle with the problems of 
the natural disaster, as well as trying to make the business succeed. 
If an entrepreneur decides to start a business when the country or region where 
the business is located is going through a period of economic crisis, consumers’ 
willingness to buy its products or services might be lower than expected. This happens 
because consumers’ incomes are usually reduced during an economic crisis. This is 
because many people lose their jobs, or the number of hours they work is reduced. 
In the event of a pandemic, such as COVID-19, businesses may have to face the 
challenge of temporarily closing their doors. This results in them not being able to 
sell their goods and services, which is a key requirement for a business to survive, 
especially when it is a new business that has no profits saved from previous years. 
On the other hand, new businesses can thrive thanks to opportunities. 
Case study - Online learning: pivoting to face challenges 
Conceptual understanding: 
Change 
during COVID-19 
o 
o 
; 
The COVID-19 
pandemic 
i 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, students were not allowed to attend in-person 
3 
ki 
an example of an external 
classes because of a worldwide lockdown. The education industry had to change to 
factor that caused rapid and 
meet new requirements as schools were forced to adapt to online teaching. 
widespread change. 
The pandemic highlighted the importance and potential of technology within the 
education sector. 
Even after schools and universities were allowed to re-open, they are still using online 
resources to enhance the teaching and learning experience for educators and students. 
Investment in the technology supporting education (sometimes called EdTech) has 
been increasing, and many businesses continue to offer new and exciting ways to 
learn online. This drastic worldwide change presented opportunities for innovation 
in the EdTech world, which continue to support students and teachers. 
11

Introduction to business management 
The COVID-19 pandemic 
meant many schools had to 
rely on technology for online 
teaching 
Identifying a gap in the market: When a business identifies that a good or service 
that consumers are willing to buy is not available in the market, this presents an 
opportunity for them. If the business is able to meet that demand with the goods or 
services they produce, they are presented with a chance to succeed by being the first 
to produce these goods or services. An example is when pharmaceutical companies 
started producing vitamins in a form aimed at children because of parents asking 
companies to develop them to complement their children’s nutrition. 
Operating in niche markets: Some new businesses are created because the 
entrepreneurs behind them understand a specific market. If the business decides 
to operate in a market that is relatively small, and where there are few competitors, 
its chances of succeeding are greater if the entrepreneur has the specific knowledge 
needed regarding the goods and services sold. 
Acting as innovators: Bringing innovative products or services to the market 
will ensure the future success of the business. This could be done by innovating on 
products that already exist in the market or by creating totally new products. 
Practice questions 
Atelier2two 
Hussaina is a founder and designer at Atelier2two. Atelier2two is a garment 
and apparel manufacturing company. It was founded with the idea of providing 
effortless, luxury modest wear. Hussaina invested her own money into her business. 
Atelier2two’s production processes include designing, material selection, cutting, 
stitching, ironing, and packaging. Hussaina has outsourced shipping and delivery to 
a courier company. She uses social media platforms for marketing and distribution. 
12

