Social media platforms allow her to develop her brand and interact with customers 
to understand their needs and wants. 
1 
Identify the resources needed for a garment and apparel manufacturing 
business. 
(4 marks) 
2 List the business functional areas involved in operating a garment 
and apparel business. 
(4 marks) 
3 Explain how Atelier2two adds value to the final product and has 
a competitive advantage. 
(6 marks) 
Learning outcomes 
1.2 Types of business entities 
Learningoutcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
+ make the distinction between the private and public sectors 
* 
identify the main features of the following types of organizations: 
o sole traders 
o partnerships 
o privately held companies 
o publicly held companies 
+ 
identify the main features of the following types of for-profit social enterprises: 
o private sector companies 
o public sector companies 
o cooperatives 
+ 
identify the main features of the following type of non-profit social enterprise: 
o non-governmental organization (NGO). 
This section focuses on different kinds of business entities. It discusses the different 
types of sectors and organizations, and examines their features and differences. 
Economic sectors 
Economies all around the world are divided into the public sector and the private 
sector. These sectors are used to organize the economy and differentiate between 
different firms. 
Sector: A business sector (primary, secondary, tertiary, etc.) is one in which businesses 
engage in similar or related business activities. 
Public sector: Public sector organizations are under the control of regional andor 
national governments. 
Private sector: The private sector is the economy’s commercial sector, mostly owned 
and operated by private individuals and organizations with a profit incentive. 
The private sector 
The private sector consists of households, businesses, and a range of organizations. 
These companies operate in a wide range of fields. All private sector organizations are 
privately owned by individuals or businesses, not by a government. 
18

A 
Hospitals are typically part of 
the public sector. This is a 
public hospital in New Delhi, 
India 
14 
Introduction to business management 
Private sector businesses can be largc orsmall, such as Target, Walmart, Amazon, or 
your local corner store. If one of your friends runs a small bakery from their house, 
then they're the owner of a private business. 
The primary goal of a private sector business is to generate enough income so that it 
can make profits for its owners or shareholders. These businesses take risks to provide 
jobs that will ultimately generate profits for them. Private sector companies use 
resources efficiently to reduce costs and increase profit. Governments have some legal 
authority over private businesses (the extent of which varies from country to country, 
sometimes from region to region), but otherwise do not interfere with private sector 
operations. 
The public sector 
The public sector consists of industries and services that are owned and controlled by 
governments. 
Federal government, state governments, and local governments are part of the public 
sector. The public sector offers services to the general population, such as social 
welfare, transport services, education, and healthcare services. 
In contrast to the private sector, the main purpose of the public sector is not to make 
profit. The main goal of the public sector is to ensure the supply of essential services to 
the general population. 
Public—private partnerships 
Governments can outsource projects to private sector companies. This enables the 
government to use private sector expertise to reduce the cost of providing services to 
the public. However, sometimes the private sector dominates the service, and the role 
of the public sector diminishes. 
Case study - Public-private partnerships in the healthcare sector 
The private sector has tremendous potential to assist governments in achieving 
their public health goals. 
In order to find ways of working with the private sector that can be scaled up across 
regions and different healthcare needs and issues, governments need to develop 
strategies that define and enforce best practice for private sector involvement based 
on the lessons learned from past and current collaborations. 
Tuberculosis (TB) presents a variety of healthcare issues, but also provides insights 
into potential solutions that could reduce the risk of TB and other diseases. 
An article in the online newspaper Mint explains that, in India, nearly half of all TB 
patients seek treatment in the private sector. Private-Provider Interface Agencies 
(PPIAs) were established in Mumbai, Patna, and Mehsana by the Indian government. 
The government collaborated with a network of private physicians, pharmacies, 
hospitals, and laboratories to make sure that TB diagnosis and treatment practices 
followed the established ‘Standards of TB Care’.

As aresult, there was a 351 per cent and a 532 per cent rise in TB case registrations 
from the private sector between 2014 and 2018 in Mumbai and Patna, respectively. 
Accurate case reporting leads to better diagnosis and treatment. Since 2018, 
the PPIA programs have been scaled up and introduced in more than 170 
districts across India, but there is more work to be done to guarantee smooth 
implementation throughout the country. 
The main differences between the private and 
public sectors 
The private sector is currently undergoing rapid growth, with the public sector 
in many countries shrinking due to reduced government spending and increased 
privatization (where a public organization is sold to the private sector). Private 
sector salaries and benefits are, in places, perceived as superior to those on offer in 
the public sector, so there has been a noticeable number of public sector employees 
moving to the private sector. Change and innovation is harder in the public sector 
due to the size and history of the organizations (for example, the UK’s National 
Health Service (NHS) is the largest employer in the country). Long-term employees 
may also struggle to deal with change (see Unit 2 for more on employees’ resistance 
to change). 
Both sectors contribute substantially to the economy of 
a country. 
Table 1.2 The differences between the public sector and the private sector 
Public sector 
Private sector 
Owned and controlled by the 
Owned and controlled by individuals or 
government 
private companies 
Generally non-profit organizations 
Generally profit-making organizations 
Taxpayer capital, in the form of taxes, is | Shares and loans are used to raise capital 
used to finance public sector services 
education, public transport, the central 
media, farming 
bank, social housing, waste management 
and disposal 
Public sector organizations are able 
It is more difficult for businesses 
to get approval from the relevant 
to manage regulatory issues and 
government departments 
compliance 
Jobs in the public sector have a high 
The private sector does not offer 
level of security, with various retirement | retirement benefits; private sector jobs 
benefits 
may be highly paid, but there is no job 
security 
What is included in the public sector 
What is included in the private sector 
varies by country; it can include the 
varies by country; it can include banking, 
armed forces, healthcare, utilities, 
manufacturing, mining, retail, housing, 
The public sector appears 
to be slower in undergoing 
digital innovation than the 
private sector. 
Online resources 
This Forbes article looks at 
digital innovation in these 
sectors in more detail. 
Organizations always run 
more efficiently in the 
private sector, where they 
are free of government 
control. To what extent do 
you agree or disagree with 
this statement? 
15

16 
Introduction to business management 
Types of organizations 
There are three main types of firms: 
* 
sole traders 
* 
partnerships 
* 
limited companies or corporations 
o privately held companies 
o publicly held companies. 
Sole traders 
Sole trader or sole proprietorship is a legal form of company owned by a single 
individual, with no other shareholders. Owners have complete control over all the 
functions of the business. They make their own decisions and are not accountable to 
any partner or board of directors. In sole proprietorship, business and owner are not 
recognized as separate legal entities. All profits go to the owner: they reap the rewards 
of the hard work they put into their business. However, the owner also faces unlimited 
liability: they are responsible for paying the complete cost of any damage or liability 
incurred by the business. 
These businesses often have limited capital and resources. It is easy to set up as a 
sole trader, but business growth is limited because of the inability to generate large 
amounts of capital. If 
a firm expands excessively, a single individual may not be able to 
oversee and manage all its operations. 
The nature of the business, along with its functions and scope, is highly dependent 
upon the owner’s discretion. The owner is also directly responsible for making 
decisions that could either enhance or stop the business’ growth. 
If an individual is running a business on their own, they may not have all the required 
expertise. This can cause problems for the business. For instance, if 
a business owner 
does not know how to handle the finances, then they might face some serious losses. 
With limited financial resources, they may not be able to hire a financial advisor 
or an accountant. Therefore, the possibility of losses due to lack of skilled staff 
or 
professional management is typically greater for sole traders. 
Case study - Sole traders and rising prices 
Millions of sole proprietors are having to prepare for rising costs caused by high (and 
increasing) energy and fuel prices, even though their customers may be willing to 
pay more. According to a Sydney Morning Herald article, a survey of sole proprietors 
revealed that most felt overburdened by paperwork and bureaucracy. Those 
surveyed reportedly spend a combined 12 million hours per week on administration. 
The Reserve Bank of Australia anticipates that, by the end of 2022, inflation will 
reach 7 per cent, the highest rate in 20 years. The survey of more than 500 business 
owners showed that over 80 per cent of traders and 45 per cent of freelancers had 
been affected by high fuel prices, while 57 per cent said that business had slowed. A 
large number (around 82 per cent) of respondents were trying not to take loans or 
use credit cards to cover business expenses.

The owner of a sole trading company might have to use their personal finances or 
assets to pay the debt a business owes, if the business cannot pay on time. This could 
limit the opportunities to expand the business. 
Partnerships 
A partnership consists of two or more owners who decide to operate a business 
together and share the profit and loss. 
Partners establish a partnership agreement. A partnership agreement is a legal 
document that outlines the details about the partnership, including each partner’s 
obligations and profit-sharing percentage. 
Partners must have common business goals. Common business goals allow them to 
earn profits and enhance their business operations. 
It is important that the partners collaborate to make mutually beneficial decisions. 
Partnerships are very similar to sole traders in that the owners and the business are not 
recognized as separate legal entities, and all the partners share unlimited liabilities and 
responsibilities. 
Limited companies or corporations 
A limited company or corporation is a company where the shareholders will lose only what 
they have invested if the company goes bankrupt. They will not lose their personal assets. 
While corporations represent a small percentage of the total number of businesses, 
they dominate in terms of assets and monetary value of sales. Corporations are not as 
easy to establish or maintain as proprietorships or partnerships. They are formed by 
filing documents with the appropriate government agency. Companies decide where to 
incorporate based on where they do business and the relevant regulations within a country. 
Unlike proprietorships and partnerships, corporations are recognized as separate 
legal entities that can enter legal contracts and own property. Profits are taxed at 
the corporate tax rate. A distinguishing feature of corporations is the separation of 
ownership from management. Corporations are owned by individuals who hold 
shares in the company but are run by employees. 
Advantages of being a limited company 
» 
Corporate tax laws may be more attractive in some circumstances, thus allowing 
tax deferral and avoidance. 
» The separation of ownership from control allows corporations to obtain the best 
available management team. 
* 
Limited liability makes ownership more attractive to shareholders and investors. 
* 
Transfer of ownership is relatively easy, so shareholders can ‘cash out’ if they need 
access to their money or are unhappy with the company’s direction. 
* The ability to access the capital market allows corporations to grow. 
Limited companies can be privately held companies or publicly held companies. 
Privately held limited companies 
The shares in a privately held company are not openly traded and can only pass to 
another person with the agreement of other shareholders. 
17

Do CEOs have different 
ethical obligations and 
responsibilities 
compared to their 
employees? 
18 
Introduction to business management 
Private companies are owned by individuals or privately operating corporations. Stock 
shares of the company are not traded on a public stock exchange. 
The number of privately held companies is greater than the number of publicly held 
companies. Although many large private corporations have become publicly held 
companies to induce investment, there are still numerous companies that operate 
privately. 
To successfully run a privately owned company, it is important to have complete 
autonomy over the decisions regarding operations and functions. Privately held 
companies do not have to adhere to as many regulations as those that are publicly 
held, so they can think about long-term benefits and concentrate on the processes that 
might bring benefit to the company. 
Disadvantages of privately held companies 
» Shares cannot be traded via public exchange so there is a lack of liquidity. 
* 
Itis hard to value such companies due to a lack of information. 
» Alack of corporate governance structure (like those in public companies) may 
hinder operations. 
* 
Selling shares can take a long time. 
Publicly held limited companies 
A publicly held company is owned by at least two people, and its shares are freely sold 
and traded on stock exchanges. Shares can be bought by anyone. 
While company management usually own some shares in the company, there are 
also usually many shareholders who do not have any direct involvement in the 
management of the business. These shareholders exert their influence over the 
corporation (at least, in principle) by electing the board of directors. The directors, in 
turn, determine the firm’s strategic direction, pick its management team, and monitor 
their actions. Owners can sell their shares to another investor. This contrasts with 
proprietorships, which must sell the entire business. With partnerships, if one or 
more of the partners wants to get out, a new business must be established, and a new 
partnership agreement drawn up. 
A publicly held firm is distinguished from a privately held one in several ways. 
Stockholder ownership 
Most publicly held corporations have majority investor ownership, but many privately 
held companies are controlled by a small number of people in a partnership (or one 
person). These stockholders may choose to purchase or sell securities to increase the 
value of their investment. 
Board of directors 
The board of directors represents individual investors. The key decision-makers who 
direct the company’s operations are hired by this group. People who possess the most 
shares in the company may be on the board. 
Corporate leadership 
Most publicly traded corporations are managed by a chief executive officer (CEO), who 
oversees the whole business team. The CEO oversees vice presidents, managers, and 
executives.

Public financial information 
Public corporations are required to comply with transparency requirements and 
financial reporting standards according to the regulatory rules set out by the 
government(s). As a company’s financial data is easily accessible, its investors can 
calculate the business’ value. 
Purchasing shares in a publicly traded firm has numerous advantages for investors, but 
it also has certain disadvantages. 
Advantages of a publicly held company 
Transparency: A corporation must publish financial documents that explain the 
business model it is using before it launches an initial public offering (IPO). These 
documents cover cash liquidity and the corporate finance structure. 
Ongoing reporting requirements: Different regulatory agencies watch over publicly 
listed corporations’ activities. These agencies request yearly reports outlining corporate 
structure, budget, and financials. Such procedures increase openness, strengthen 
corporate legitimacy, and keep shareholders informed of business operations. 
Portfolio diversification: An investor can create a diverse financial portfolio by 
investing in various public companies that offer a range of products. 
Access to capital: Companies that go public can raise substantial funds for their 
operations as well as for essential expenses like staff wages. If investors are happy with 
the general direction of the company’s success, this increased cash flow enables the 
company to take risks and cultivate a devoted client base, though it may initially result 
in losses. 
Disadvantages of a publicly held company 
Minimal investor control: Most ordinary investors have little influence on how a 
publicly listed company conducts business. When choosing board members, they may 
be able to cast a single vote, but the board retains ultimate authority. Some publicly 
traded corporations grant their founders a veto-proof majority over corporate board 
decisions. 
Risks: There are numerous risks associated with establishing a publicly listed 
company. There is the possibility that a publicly listed company may be valued far 
higher than its real value, even considering all its assets. If a business is not profitable 
for an extended length of time, the share value will fall, and the business may 
eventually fail. 
Regulations: When a company goes public, it needs to comply with a wide range of 
regulations, including the ones that require significant investment in staff and vendor 
services. 
For-profit social enterprises 
Private sector companies 
A for-profit social enterprise is created with one aim in mind: the generation of 
revenue but with ethical practices. It is a profit-making business with social objectives 
at the heart of its operations. Revenue is generated in ways that are ethically 
responsible, and then the profits are used to improve the business’ activities and benefit 
An initial public offering 
{IPO) is the first time a 
private company goes 
public through listing its 
shares on one or more 
stock exchanges. It allows 
a company to sell shares to 
investors as a way of raising 
capital. This process is also 
known as ‘floating on the 
stock market 
19

20 
Introduction to business management 
the community. These enterprises do not rely on charities or donations. A for-profit 
social enterprise may have environmental goals among its objectives. 
Social enterprises do not differ from for-profit commercial organizations in terms of 
their products. They can produce goods or provide services, and must choose a legal 
structure for their business activities. These enterprises can operate nationally, as a 
limited company, or as a cooperative, which is a small local enterprise. For-profit social 
enterprises also use business principles to achieve social goals and to compete with 
other businesses in the market. 
Social enterprises commonly have three main objectives: 
1 Economic: to make a profit from their operations and reinvest it back into the 
business. 
2 Social: to provide employment opportunities for the local community while also 
supporting disadvantaged or marginalized members of the community. 
3 Environmental: to protect the environment and manage the business in a way 
that is environmentally sustainable and ethically responsible. 
For-profit social enterprises hope to achieve social objectives while earning revenue 
and making profit so that they can keep operating and expand their business. No 
business can deliver social benefits if it is unable to manage its own financial health. 
Case study - Rivian 
Rivian is a US company founded in 2009 that manufactures electric vehicles and 
technology. While the company initially started with the idea of creating electric 
sports cars, it later changed its focus to trucks and vans. 
The company’s founder, R] Scaringe, says that ‘Rivian exists to create products 
and services that help our planet transition to carbon-neutral energy and 
transportation’. 
When the firm started trading in November 2021, its shares increased by 30 per 
cent, boosting its market value to $100 billion. Amazon owns 20 per cent of Rivian 
and has said it will buy 100,000 electric delivery vans from the firm once they are 
available. 
Despite the firm being compared to Elon Musk’s Tesla, the brand wants to have 
distinct products. It has beaten rivals to design and produce a premium ‘All- 
American’ pickup truck that is both effective and powered by electricity. 
Public sector companies 
A public sector company is a legal organization established by a central government 
to engage in commercial operations on the government’s behalf. Such an organization 
may have the government as its sole owner or as its partial owner.

These businesses have independent legal identities. This means they can sue or be 
sued for infractions even if they are owned by the state or working on its behalf 
nationwide. The government has the authority to appoint new directors and to make 
other crucial decisions. 
These companies can also be called government-owned corporations (GOC). They are 
state-owned organizations, and are not to be confused with publicly traded businesses 
whose stock is partially held by the government. Therefore, these businesses are 
genuine public corporations that serve the interests of the general public. One of their 
stockholders just happens to be a government organization. 
The United States, South Africa, Norway, and New Zealand are just a few countries 
that have for-profit state-owned businesses. Most of these businesses will be legally 
categorized as business entities. Therefore, these companies must abide by the laws 
and rules that govern how they conduct business, and they risk being held liable for 
any illegal actions. 
Even though these businesses are inherently for-profit ones, some of them do not 
generate a profit. For instance, several nations’ postal services have been losing money 
for along time. While some businesses are allowed to collapse, those that are seen as 
essential to a nation’s infrastructure may receive public funds so that their operations 
don’t fail. In these situations, the businesses may cost the government a significant 
sum of money rather than making money. Governments in some countries, for 
example, Australia, have frequently been charged with creating ‘zombie businesses’ 
that virtually never generate any income. 
Public corporations 
Public corporations and private businesses are found in many countries. Public 
corporations are under government management and ownership. Serving the general 
public is one of the key goals of public sector enterprises, while making a profit is not. 
The primary social goal of most nations is to satisfy the basic needs of the general 
population. 
A government minister will appoint the management of a public corporation. The 
general population can access the essential services provided by public businesses for 
free orat a very low cost. The government oversees the corporations and ensures they 
are run appropriately. By controlling public sector organizations, a government can 
influence a country’s employment rates, wages, and productivity. 
Cooperatives 
A cooperative is an organization that is owned and controlled by an association 
of people to meet their common economic, social, andfor cultural needs and 
aspirations through a jointly owned and democratically controlled business 
(enterprise). 
All members of the cooperative have an equal share, control, and ownership of the 
organization, and can contribute to the decision-making process. 
21

The term non- 
governmental 
organization' first 
appeared in Article 71 of 
the UM Charter, which 
was published in 1945. 
To what extent are ethical 
considerations involved 
in the operations and 
activities of NGOs, and 
how do they ensure 
accountability and 
transparency? 
Conceptual understanding: 
Creativity 
Discuss the critical importance 
of creativity and innovation in 
today's organizations. 
22 
Introduction to business management 
Cooperatives operate in almost all industries, including agriculture and farming, 
financial services, and housing. There are three main types of cooperatives: 
* 
producer cooperatives, which produce goods 
 consumer cooperatives, which purchase goods in bulk or in large amounts to 
benefit from economies of scale 
» worker cooperatives, which provide services and sell goods. 
All cooperatives are democratically owned and controlled. 
Cooperatives provide benefits to a group of people with a common goal: they are 
owned and run by their employees and customers to carry out an economic activity 
for mutual benefit. They operate in a socially responsible way. The profits are equally 
shared between members as dividends. 
Non-profit social enterprises 
Non-governmental organizations 
A non-governmental organization (NGO) is a non-profit group that works 
independently with support from a government body. They work on national, 
international, and community-based levels to address problems. NGOs work for the 
betterment of society and to tackle political and environmental concerns. 
There is no fixed definition of an NGO. They are generally defined as non-profit groups 
that operate without the influence of the government, although they do receive funds 
from the government. 
There are also non-profit organizations (NPOs). There is a narrow difference 
between NPOs and NGOs. Different countries interpret these types of organization 
differently. In the US, NGO is not applied to non-profit organizations, but to 
organizations operating internationally. Some countries classify their own civil 
society groups as NGOs. 
NGOs perform various activities to bring social or political change on a large scale. 
They play a vital role in the development of society, improving communication and 
allowing citizens to participate. 
Practice questions 
Nicolas and Loura want to start a vehicle rental business in Punta del Este, a seaside 
resort in the Southern Hemisphere. The business will operate as a partnership and 
be called Bip Bip (BB). The beach and water sports attract many tourists during the 
summer (December to February). BB will rent out convertible cars, electric cars, and 
minivans. BB will purchase these vehicles through a leasing scheme. 
1 
Identify two features of a partnership. 
(2 marks) 
2 Identify two reasons why a lending institution might be reluctant 
to fund BB’s expansion plans. 
(4 marks) 
3 Explain two problems that BB might have in building a customer 
base in new markets such as Punta del Este. 
(6 marks)

