Learning outcomes 
1.3 Business objectives 
Learningoutoomes 
| 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
+ distinguish between vision statement and mission statement 
+ explain common business objectives, including: 
o growth 
o profit 
o protecting shareholder value 
o ethical objectives 
* examine strategic and tactical objectives 
+ 
evaluate corporate social responsibility. 
What are business objectives? 
This section looks at what the short-term and long-term goals of a business might 
be. Let's say that you are establishing a business. As one of the first steps, you will set 
certain goals you want to achieve. These are business objectives, and they provide a 
company with the direction in which to grow and move. Business objectives are a 
range of measurable results that a company or a business hopes to achieve and/or 
maintain to ensure its growth and success. 
Business objectives provide a company with guidelines regarding decisions related 
to its operations. The business objectives of 
a company tend to stay the same unless 
the organization goes through a drastic change. Possible business objectives could be 
ensuring that the quality of the product remains the same, or that a business engages 
with more online customers, leading to increased sales and turnover. 
Business objectives are specific and measurable. This allows for easy accountability 
and periodic checks regarding growth. When setting objectives, a company also needs 
to make sure that they are relevant and attainable. Objectives should follow a schedule 
that is regularly monitored and allows for achievement of the goals. 
A company will have two types of goals: long-term ones and short-term ones. Long- 
term goals often consist of several short-term goals. They require a lot of time and 
considerable planning. Short-term goals tend not to require much time or many 
resources. 
Vision statement 
A vision statement describes what a company wants to become in the future. It 
outlines the present and future business objectives or goals. A coherent and pragmatic 
vision statement is key when establishing a business. The vision must align with the 
core values of the company. It should link to the business’ strategic planning and the 
environment and culture in which the business is functioning. 
Vision statements can be reviewed and updated according to the needs of the business. 
Changes should be minimal so that there is no confusion or miscommunication. The 
purpose of a vision statement is to direct the strategic plans of the business. It can also 
motivate employees and help the business stand out from its competitors. 
IB learner profile 
Reflective 
Select a company of your 
choice and evaluate and reflect 
how creativity and innovation 
helps that company to achieve 
its objectives. 
Toolkit connection 
A business plan breaks down 
the goals of a company 
and outlines the methods 
to achieve those goals. It 
should include a vision and 
a mission statement. 
A business plan presents 
a suitable strategy for 
the growth of a business, 
determining the future 
direction of the company. 
23

If the effects of a mission 
statement cannot be easily 
measured, does this mean 
that it is worthless? 
24 
Introduction to business management 
Here are the vision statements of a few well-known companies: 
IKEA: Our vision is to create a better everyday life for many people. 
This mission statement is short and aspirational. It clarifies the objective while setting 
the tone for the company. 
McDonald’s: To be the best quick service restaurant experience. Being the best 
means providing outstanding quality, service, cleanliness, and value, so that we 
make every customer in every restaurant smile. 
This vision statement is multifaceted and provides a roadmap for the company to 
follow. It covers different aspects of the business and gives the customers a clear idea of 
what they should expect. 
Google: To provide access to the world’s information in one click. 
This statement is succinct and demonstrates Google’s customer-centered approach. 
Mission statement 
A mission statement is a short statement made by an organization, intended to 
communicate its aims to customers, employees, shareholders, and other stakeholders. 
Such a statement should be aligned with the vision statement. 
A mission statement provides a company with a plan that allows it to define the 
purpose of the company and its functions. A mission statement defines the culture of 
a company as well as describing its long-term objectives. A good mission statement 
indicates the business’ ideal customer and leads to an ideal customer profile based 
on thorough market research. It also highlights the key points of 
a business that add 
unique value to it, differentiating it from the competition. Mission statements can 
be customer-oriented, socially conscious, environmentally responsible, or product- 
oriented. 
Here are some examples of mission statements of multinational companies: 
Microsoft: To empower every person and every organization on the planet to 
achieve more. 
This mission statement is inclusive, short, and memorable. It identifies the purpose 
and vision of the company. 
Forbes: To deliver information on the people, ideas, and technologies changing 
the world to our community of affluent business decision-makers. 
Such a mission statement sets out the company’s agenda. It touches on the different 
services and products of the company while remaining short and memorable. 
Research the vision statements and mission statements of five companies. 
Using these statements, explain how a vision statement differs from a mission 
statement.

Differences between vision and mission statements 
A vision statement is the long-term goal or objective that a company hopes to achieve. 
A mission statement outlines the actions that a company will take to achieve that long- 
term goal or objective. 
Table 1.3 The differences between a mission statement and a vision statement 
Vision statement 
Mission statement 
Discusses ultimate goals and talks about | Outlines the activities and plan of actions 
where the company is headed 
that must be followed to accomplish the 
goal 
Provides motivation and serves as an 
Provides guidance and helps a company 
inspirational tool that contributes to 
recognize its exact functions 
achieving goals 
Allows employees to understand why 
Helps employees in carrying out 
they are doing specific tasks 
particular tasks 
Focuses on the future 
Mainly focuses on present operations 
Vision comes before mission: it has a 
Is secondary compared to the vision and 
long timeline and several short-term 
has a short timeline; it can be changed 
goals that help to achieve the final 
according to the present circumstances 
objective 
Has a wide scope 
Has a narrow scope 
Common business objectives 
While being established, a company sets different objectives that it hopes to achieve in 
the short or long term. These goals allow the business to continue growing. Business 
objectives are specific and are established through analysis and assessment. Different 
businesses have different objectives, depending on the market(s) they interact with. 
However, there are some objectives that are common to all businesses. 
Growth 
Achieving a substantial amount of growth is one of the top objectives of any business. 
Growth is a term that may refer to profits, revenues, enhanced working conditions for 
employees, or increased capacity for business. Growth could also include increasing the 
business’ market share in the short term or its size in the long term. 
Profits 
Earning profits or enhancing profitability is also one of the top priorities for a business. 
Generating profits is often the main reason why a business is set up. The business 
must make sure that it performs well so that its shareholders, creditors, and owners 
benefit. However, there are certain legal restrictions on how a business can operate. For 
example, a business must not exploit the community or its workforce to achieve profits. 
Stability 
For a business to continue to operate at an optimum level, its management must have 
certain objectives in place that will ensure its stability. A business can achieve stability 
through gaining the loyalty and confidence of its customers. It should also have 
sustainable practices in place that account for employee satisfaction and improve the 
To what extent do 
emotions motivate 
stakeholders to pursue an 
organization's goals? 
25

Developing technology, such 
as drone delivery, may lead to 
different regions having a 
more cohesive set of laws 
26 
4 
Introduction to business management 
business’ reputation. Moreover, a business needs to be well-equipped to survive market 
fluctuations. 
Efficiency 
Economic efficiency is the ability of 
a business or process to produce goods at the 
lowest cost possible so that they can be sold at a comparatively low price 
and the business can still make a profit. A business can use innovative methods 
and techniques to achieve its desired results and keep costs down. Efficiency 
includes the lowest possible energy consumption (and other overheads) and high 
productivity, while ensuring the best quality product possible. A business can 
achieve this by employing skilled individuals, training them appropriately, and 
motivating them. 
Survival 
To achieve long-term survival, a business must utilize certain techniques. A business 
will survive if it remains ahead of its competition. A business may aim to improve 
its market standing and enhance its capacity, ultimately enabling it to focus on other 
objectives. A company will focus on recognition, a good public image, and on building 
a loyal customer base to ensure its survival. Every business must focus on survival as 
this directly leads to growth and expansion. 
Protecting shareholder value 
A business needs to make sure that the interests of its investors, creditors, and 
shareholders are protected. This can be achieved through periodic and assured 
returns on investments. A company can increase its shareholder value through 
targeted goals and growth. Satisfying the shareholders is one of the top priorities 
of 
a business as this leads to increased investment and the achievement of other 
objectives. 
Ethical objectives 
Ethical objectives allow for the application of moral principles when interacting with 
stakeholders. The ethical objectives of a business are applicable to both tactical and 
strategic actions. They include complying with existing laws and regulations, and 
ensuring that the company’s actions do not cause conflict. Companies in different 
regions may have different ethical objectives. Such goals lead to a positive relationship 
with the consumer and enhance the value of the brand in the market. They can also 
attract more investors, feeding into the business’ success. 

Many businesses are 
including metrics about 
Case study - Lloyds Bank 
The UK’s 2022 cost of living crisis was caused by high inflation, high fuel and energy 
their environmental, social, 
costs, and tax increases, without increases in wages or benefits. Prices in the UK 
or ethical performance 
were increasing at their fastest rate in 40 years, with inflation hitting 9 per cent in 
?1?”85“1? their financial 
information. 
June 2022 and expected to rise higher. 
- Can well-being, or other 
social variables, be 
In August 2022, Lloyds Bank employees received a one-off £1,000 payment to help 
with the rising cost of living in the UK. This payment was the result of a campaign 
by trade union Unite. 
measured? 
- Does all knowledge 
impose moral 
obligations on those 
Unite is a British trade union formed in 2007 to protect workers’ rights, equality, 
S 
and diversity in the workplace. 
‘Unite members’ collective action has put desperately needed money into the 
pockets of staff on the front line’, said Sharon Graham, Unite’s general secretary. 
‘Staff will welcome the £1,000 bonus, but there is still a long way to go to eradicate 
low pay in one of the economy’s most profitable sectors.’ 
Lloyds Bank said it expected the economic environment to remain a key feature in 
pay negotiations with its employees in 2023. 
Strategic objectives 
Strategic objectives are long-term objectives that define the purpose of 
a business and 
impact its survival and success. Strategic objectives could take decades for a business 
to achieve. They are made by the executives and are aligned with the vision statement. 
Strategic objectives are the big-picture goals of a company. They may include 
launching new products, growing a company’s market share, and attracting more 
profits. For example, Walmart hoped to capture market share in e-commerce by 
performing better than its main competitor, Amazon. To fulfill this strategic objective, 
Walmart improved its online presence and enhanced its product range by buying other 
companies (such as Shoebuy, ModCloth, and FlipKart). 
Tactical objectives 
The tactical objectives of a business break down its long-term strategic goals into 
several short-term clear deliverables. This allows a business to achieve its targets in a 
shorter period. Tactical objectives are often flexible and can be changed as required. 
Tactical planning helps a business to break down its strategy into small, easily 
achievable goals and provides a more efficient way of achieving them. 
Tactical objectives are not risky and are mostly action-oriented. The results from such 
objectives are desired immediately. These goals are often intermediate steps taken to 
achieve bigger and more executive goals. These objectives range from performance 
targets to meeting sales quota. Although they do not seem that important in isolation, 
when combined, they make a substantial contribution to the performance of a company. 
If tactical objectives are not achieved, this may not harm the company. They are applied in 
middle management departments, and tasks are further broken down for specific teams. 
27

Introduction to business management 
Corporate social responsibility 
Businesses have different responsibilities toward their stakeholders, including social 
responsibilities. By fulfilling their social responsibilities to different stakeholders, a 
company hopes to be viewed as a good employer, credible, responsible, and aware of 
its impact on the society in which it operates. 
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) establishes that business organizations 
are part of society, and they have a responsibility to reduce their negative impacts 
on society and maximize their positive impacts. CSR is more than a set of policies 
incorporated into business objectives out of goodwill. 
CSR implementation by a business is influenced by several factors. These include 
the evolving corporate culture, which now includes more focus on ethical practices 
and a more socially aware agenda than ever before. However, generating profits and 
increasing cash flow is the priority for most businesses. This means that CSR decisions 
need to align with the needs and priorities of each company. CSR decisions also reflect 
the perspectives of the board of directors or executive management. Incorporating such 
policies may set a company apart from its competitors, and potentially raise its profile. 
A company may change its CSR policy if advised to do so by government or regulating 
bodies. Activists and pressure groups may also encourage changes to certain practices. 
Government regulations and pressure group actions have forced many businesses to 
take climate change and biodiversity damage seriously. 
CSR plays an integral role when it comes to establishing a positive relationship with 
the public. A company may organize charity events, donate a percentage of its profits, 
or ask its employees to volunteer for different social programs. Such actions can 
improve a company’s brand image and its reputation in the community. Any charity 
connections should be carefully explored before implementation to ensure that the 
company’s and the charity’s objectives and priorities align. 
CSR can also foster a stronger and more positive bond between the business and the 
people it employs. It can increase morale and help employees feel more connected 
with their community. 
Figure 1.6 There are many > 
factors to consider when 
looking at corporate sacial 
responsibility 
i 
RESOURCES 
SUSTAINABILITY 
28

To promote CSR, a business must be transparent and accountable. This allows 
stakeholders and shareholders to feel more empowered and engaged when it comes to 
the decision-making process. 
Companies often adopt CSR policies once they have reached a certain size and 
profitability. This increase in business activity allows the company to give back to the 
community. The larger a business has become, the more impact it will have on the world; 
thus, it should be more socially responsible. A company then hopes to achieve ethical 
and social objectives to lessen its negative impact and increase positive perceptions of it. 
CSR policies and schemes should also benefit the company. When developing CSR 
policies, it is important for the business to keep clear objectives in mind and ensure 
that the company is fully able to achieve those goals. 
Advantages 
» 
CSR enables companies to protect the environment through a comprehensive 
series of actions. These can lead to a reduction in a company’s carbon footprint 
and waste. It can also lead to a reduction in packaging, which has the additional 
benefit of cutting costs for the business. 
* 
(SR can lead companies to establish new safety measures. This allows the 
business to enhance its quality and develop safety mechanisms. This then enables 
it to market its products effectively and provides a competitive advantage. 
* CSR can improve the working conditions of employees. This can make the 
company a more desirable employer for existing and potential employees. 
Case study — TC Transcontinental 
TC Transcontinental is a pioneer in flexible packaging in the US, Canada, and Latin 
America. It is also Canada’s largest printer. In its attempt to build a socially responsible 
company, TC Transcontinental has set five major goals as part of its 2025 prospectus: 
Greener growth: TC intends to change its operations such that it cuts down 
extensive consumption of natural resources and production of greenhouse gases, 
and recovers non-hazardous waste. 
An inclusive and safe environment: TC aims to contribute to employees’ 
development and well-being by reducing the incident frequency rate (IFR), 
increasing women representatives in various job positions, and increasing ethnic 
diversity among front-line supervisors. 
Innovative and sustainable products: Packaging and printed products will be 
100 per cent recyclable. 
Consolidated with its community: TC intends to invest in areas such as health, 
education, and local communities by providing sponsorships and donations 
totaling $5 million. 
Governance and responsible practices: TC is revising its policies and training, 
and providing better controls to protect its data. Employees will be asked to read 
and sign agreements about ethical behavior, and they will receive anti-corruption 
training. Enterprise risk management programs must be annually reviewed, 
including climate change risks, and the board of directors or one of its committees 
will endorse each program. 
The Met Zero Asset 
Managers initiative is an 
international group that 
was set up in December 
2020. Itis made up of 273 
investors who manage 
563 trillion in assets, and 
who are committed to 
supporting the goal of 
net zero greenhouse gas 
emissions by 2050 or 
SOCner. 
29

