30 
Introduction to business management 
Select a company of your choice. 
Conduct a CSR assessment on the company and determine if CSR contributes to 
corporate environmental and social sustainability. 
* Should the company retain its CSR strategy? 
* 
If not, what actions would you recommend the company takes? 
Practice questions 
Copper Health (CH) was the market leader in the production of anti-venom 
vaccines to treat venomous snakebites. CH’s mission — influenced heavily by CSR — 
is to put customers first and profits second in the treatment of snakebites. 
Despite 100,000 deaths worldwide each year from snakebites and 400,000 serious 
injuries, CH has announced that it will no longer produce anti-venom vaccines. 
Several large Mexican, Brazilian, and Indian pharmaceutical companies have 
entered the market, selling anti-venom vaccines at a much lower price than CH. 
A spokesperson for CH said: ‘We will remain a private limited company where CSR 
remains an important driving force for our mission. Our medical research is only 
financed from retained profit. When the lower-priced competition arrived, our sales 
and profits of anti-venom vaccines decreased significantly. Treating snakebites no 
longer makes financial sense. Instead, the technology used to produce anti-venom 
vaccines will be used to research and develop other life-saving vaccines.’ 
A non-governmental organization (NGO) has demanded action. ‘CH is the largest 
manufacturer of anti-venom vaccines in the world. Although CH’s competitors are 
increasing their production of anti-venom vaccines, they will not be able to produce 
enough to satisfy demand for the next two years. There will be a major shortage. 
This will result in many life-threatening injuries and deaths.’ 
The NGO has urged CH to seek new sources of finance to continue the production 
of the anti-venom vaccine. 
1 Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for CH of having a 
mission statement. 
(4 marks) 
2 Distinguish between objectives, strategies, and tactics, and describe 
how these interrelate. 
(6 marks) 
3 Evaluate the impact that different objectives have on the behavior 
and decisions of the firm. 
(10 marks) 
1.4 Stakeholders 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
identify and understand different types of internal stakeholders 
* 
identify and understand different types of external stakeholders 
« 
discuss possible areas of conflicts between stakeholders.

This section looks at what stakeholders are and their importance, and the role they 
B s ETRr PO 
play in a business and its management. It looks at internal and external stakeholders, 
and possible conflicts that might arise between stakeholders. 
Balanced and Open-minded 
In a small group, choose a 
U nderstandi ng stakeholders 
significant business decision 
to discuss (such as, whether to 
Suppose a friend discusses her planned business venture with you. She believes that 
launch a new product, whether 
she has a product that will change the market, but to take it to market she needs 
to invest in a new market, 
capital. She asks you to invest in her business. As you believe that her business is 
whether to downsize the 
) 
o1y 
s 
. 
. 
. 
. 
workforce, etc.) and then create 
unique and will yield high profits, you decide to invest a substantial amount of your 
: 
): 
: 
a mind map to list potential 
savings in her business. Whatever decisions your friend takes regarding her business 
b 
ek e 
will affect you as well. By investing your money in the business, you have a say in the 
affected by your decision 
way things are managed. This allows you to make sure that you do not end up losing 
(e.g employees, customers, 
liers, 
i 
tors, 
local 
your money. You are now a stakeholder! 
s 
e 
communities, etc.). 
A stakeholder is not always someone who has money invested in the company or the 
Think about different 
business. Stakeholders also include any individuals who are positively or negatively 
el 
ol 
s 
e 
. 
. 
. 
. 
you are making, including 
affected by the decisions a business makes. These parties have an interest in the 
Bt 
business activities and should be allowed to advocate their interests to the business. 
stakeholder group. Discuss why it 
is important to consider different 
Stakeholders can encompass a variety of people belonging to different social groups. 
perspectives and evaluate the 
For instance, a business’ stakeholders could include its customers, members of the 
impact of business decisions 
on various stakeholders before 
local community, suppliers, investors, government, and other businesses. These 
e 
: 
making 
a final choice. 
parties have their own goals and objectives. They may make decisions that could 
: 
. 
i 
. 
b 
Finally, reflect on what you have 
ultimately have a huge impact on the business. However, the decisions taken by the 
learnt about the importance 
business will also affect these parties. Stakeholders form a network that has a lot of 
of being balanced and open 
interests in the operations and functions of the business. 
minded when making business 
decisions. 
Stakeholders are immensely important for all businesses. They have a huge amount 
of impact on the business undertakings and may also directly influence the future of 
the company. Therefore, it is important for all organizations to ensure that the key 
demands of their stakeholders are being met. A responsible business ensures that its 
strategic goals, operations, and decisions are in line with the needs and wants of the 
stakeholders. 
It may not always seem beneficial for a business to listen to its stakeholders. Some 
stakeholder decisions and objectives may not be lucrative or profitable in the short 
term. However, engagement, management, and prioritization of stakeholders are 
key to a business’ performance and may prove critical in the long term. Involving 
stakeholders in the decision-making process allows a company to build long-term and 
sustainable relationships. It also enhances its credibility in the market, which allows it 
to develop mutually beneficial bonds with important parties. Research by McKinsey 
& Company (a management consulting company) shows that through increased 
engagement of stakeholders, companies can perform well and gain more support 
from the parties involved. This allows for effective risk management and enables an 
enhanced understanding of people’s needs. 
Let us now define the word ‘stakeholders’. Stakeholders consist of various people, 
social groups, or other businesses that are directly impacted, either financially or 
physically, by the operations and functions of 
a business. Because of this, they have a 
say in how a company conducts its business. 
There are two types of stakeholders: internal and external. 
31

Introduction to business management 
Internal stakeholders 
Internal stakeholders refers to those individuals who have a direct involvement in the 
workings of the company. They can be characterized as the members of the business. 
Each of these stakeholders has varying interests and objectives when it comes to the 
business. The business also has certain responsibilities toward these parties. 
Figure 1.7 
Every business 
has internal stakeholders 
Employees 
Employees are individuals hired by the business to carry out its operations. As 
their salaries and working conditions are directly dependent on how the business is 
performing, they have a direct interest. For example, if a business performs poorly, it 
may downsize its staff, resulting in job losses. If 
a business performs well, employees 
may be given incentives and bonuses. This impacts them positively and can lead to 
raised morale and increased motivation. 
The interests of employees in a business include job security, a good salary, 
opportunities for growth, and better working conditions. 
Managers 
Company management includes individuals belonging to the executive management 
and the board of directors. This group has different interests from the employees or the 
shareholders. Management tends to focus on taking decisions that help them achieve 
the organization’s goals and maximize profits. Different departments that cover a 
range of operations are present in management. Management works to increase the 
financial gains of the business, but also makes sure that their own working conditions 
are optimal. 
The interests of management in a business include increased financial performance, 
meeting strategic and tactical goals, satisfying shareholders, and ensuring smooth 
functioning. 
Shareholders 
Shareholders are people or organizations that invest in a business. This is often done 
by buying shares that allow them to ‘take a stake in a business’. Shareholders invest in 
businesses that are likely to generate maximum return on their investments. Through 
capital investment or buying shares, they receive capital gains or dividends. 
Capital gain means that profit is generated as the value of 
a share rises. Share value rises 
when a business’ performance improves. Such a gain allows shareholders to sell their 
32

shares for a value greater than their initial investment, leading to a profit. Dividends 
refer to the profits made by the company that are divided among the shareholders. 
The interests of owners and shareholders in a business include growth of profits, 
unique long-term vision, efficient workflow, and liquidity. 
External stakeholders 
External stakeholders are not employed by the business and do not have any direct 
involvement, but they still have an interest in business operations and undertakings. 
Their indirect stakes in the business can be through an agreement between different 
businesses, community welfare, or an interest in the product being produced. 
Customers 
Customers are one of the most important groups of stakeholders. Any sort of business 
decision, particularly regarding pricing and distribution, will affect a customer’s 
decision to buy a product. The quality and quantity of a product will also have a major 
impact on a buyer’s decision. For example, if a business is unable to produce high- 
quality products, a customer may not buy its products. It is the responsibility of the 
business to provide its customers with the best product and high-end customer service. 
If there is no market for a product, then investors will not invest their capital, and the 
business will have to cease trading. Thus, customers are a priority for every business. 
The interests of customers in a business include services, quantity, quality, distribution, 
and pricing. 
Creditors 
Creditors are also external stakeholders. They invest in a business or provide capital in the 
form of loans. Creditors can be banks or financing companies. If the business fails, then 
creditors will be unable to receive their benefits, or their finance will be lost. They are the 
financiers of the business whose priority is to receive adequate returns on investments. 
The main interest of creditors in a business is the repayment of money loaned and 
payment of any interest due. 
«f Figure1.8 Every business 
also has external stakeholders 
33

34 
Introduction to business management 
Government 
National or regional governments are interested in how businesses operate. Although 
they are indirect stakeholders, their interests include collection of taxes and evidence 
that all relevant regulation and legislation requirements are being met. A government 
will have methods to ensure that businesses are meeting their requirements, and they 
may take action if a business fails to comply. Governments are also concerned about 
businesses’ ethical practices. They are interested in the wider impact that business 
activity has on society, and with how beneficial it is for the community. 
The interests of government in a business include employment and taxes, appropriate 
business practices, and protection of the environment. 
Competitors 
Competitors are also external stakeholders. They are affected by the business’ 
decisions. Competitors want to be informed about the business in order to improve 
and adjust their own strategies. 
Local community 
The local community could include groups interested in the ethical practices of 
the business and/or its impact on the community. If 
a business is creating high 
pollution, causing deforestation, raising traffic levels, or destroying wildlife or 
ecosystems, then the local community is being adversely affected. However, if 
a business is providing good working conditions, increased employment, and 
environmentally responsible business practices, then the community will be 
positively impacted. 
The interests of the local community in a business include environmental impact and 
the creation of job opportunities. 
Suppliers 
The interests that suppliers hold in a business are primarily financial. Suppliers 
provide materials to businesses. If a business is performing well and the product is 
in high demand, its suppliers will receive more orders. A considerable proportion 
of a supplier’s revenue might come from a particular business, and if that business 
performs poorly, it will reduce its orders. Purchasing practices and the quality of 
a 
product can directly impact suppliers. 
The interests of suppliers in a business include profits and increased demand for their 
goods. 
Conflict between stakeholders 
Itis very difficult for any business to listen to and act on demands from all their 
stakeholders. The decisions a business takes may reflect the majority of their 
stakeholders, but not all of them, which can cause some parties to feel overlooked or 
unsatisfied. This could create conflicts among stakeholders. 
If stakeholders have goals that do not align with each other, we say that these 
stakeholders are in conflict. This ends up affecting the performance of the business as 
well as how successful it is. A conflict among stakeholders could also affect the public 
image of the business.

Shareholders might fall into conflict with the community as shareholders want the 
business to take decisions that will increase profits. However, this might result in 
increased production, which could have harmful effects on the environment. 
Employees could have a conflict with management if they request better working 
conditions and increased salaries. Addressing that demand may reduce the company’s 
profits. If employees are not performing well, they may end up in conflict with 
management. During the COVID-19 pandemic, several companies picked efficiency 
over employees. This resulted in downsizing and job losses. Such actions created an 
unfavorable image of the business in the public eye. 
Some businesses might compromise on the quality of their product to maximize 
profits. This option may keep the creditors and shareholders happy, but the customers 
and local community will not be happy with such a decision. 
A common source of stakeholder conflict is when businesses relocate overseas 
due to cheaper prices for raw material and labor. This might be a good decision for 
the business and its shareholders but negatively impacts the community and the 
government left behind, as it leads to a reduction in employment. 
These different examples and types of stakeholder conflicts allow us to understand 
how multifaceted this issue is. Every company must be vigilant and efficient in solving 
such problems so that the success of its business is not adversely impacted. 
Practice questions 
Lebanon is facing its worst socioeconomic crisis in decades. It hosts the highest 
number of refugees per capita worldwide. The government estimates that the 
country currently hosts 1.5 million Syrian refugees, 90 per cent of whom are living 
in extreme poverty, and 13,715 refugees of other nationalities. 
SUDO Consultants is a cloud consulting firm started in 2020 that focuses on 
AWS Cloud Consultancy and security. SUDO’s vision is to be the leading digital 
company that is elevating businesses around the world. Its vision would be 
incomplete if the company wasn't also socially responsible. One of SUDO’s core 
values is integrity: “We are honest and we show a consistent and uncompromising 
adherence to strong moral and ethical principles and values. We are always 
truthful and accurate in everything we do.’ 
SUDO worked with a telehealth provider to deploy telehealth kiosks in Lebanon. 
The telehealth kiosks allow refugees to access doctors and medical support. On-the- 
ground nurses help refugees to use the kiosks properly. 
The kiosks connect with the SUDO’s backend cloud services. SUDO utilizes its best 
engineers to deploy this critical solution to ensure the solution works all the time 
and is as secure as it can be to protect patient data. 
1 
 Identify one key internal and one external stakeholder for the 
company. 
(2 marks) 
2 
Explain the interest of SUDO’s stakeholders and the likelihood 
of conflict between them. 
(4 marks) 
3 
Evaluate the impact that differing stakeholder objectives have 
on SUDO'’s behavior and decisions. 
(6 marks) 
TOK questions about 
interpreting different pieces 
of information include the 
following. 
- Are some types of 
information less open 
to interpretation than 
others? 
» Why do facts sometimes 
not change our minds? 
+ How can we decide 
between the views of 
experts when they 
disagree with each 
other? 
35

