Toolkit connection 
The Ansoff matrix is a 
strategic framework that 
allows business executives 
to consider possibilities 
for business growth. It 
covers market penetration, 
market development, 
product development and 
diversification strategies. 
36 
Introduction to business management 
1.5 Growth and evolution 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
 understand internal and external economies and diseconomies of scale 
« 
distinguish between internal and external growth 
* 
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of growing a business 
» 
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a business staying small 
* examine external growth methods, including: 
o mergers and acquisitions (M&As) 
o takeovers 
o joint ventures 
o strategic alliances 
o franchising. 
Over time, businesses grow or reduce in size as they adapt and respond to changes 
in the external environment and pursue their business objectives. Businesses need to 
stay relevant and up to date with what is happening around them. The growth and 
sustainability of a business is directly linked to how it evolves or develops. Businesses 
need to focus on expansion to ensure a sustainable business model. Amazon, Google, 
Nike, and Apple have been able to expand by using effective and productive growth- 
related strategies. 
Economies and diseconomies of scale 
A company’s or industry’s growth can be affected by economies and diseconomies of 
scale. In order to understand economies and diseconomies of scale, it is important to 
understand what average cost means. The average cost of 
an item is the ratio of the 
total cost of production to the number of items produced. As an organization grows 
and production increases, the average cost will decrease. 
Economies of scale occur when there is a decrease in the average cost due to growth. 
The business can charge lower prices than its competitors. In those industries with 
high set-up costs, economies of scale enable larger firms to undercut smaller firms 
and drive them out of business. In the long term, economies of scale can decrease 
competition and cause a monopoly. 
Diseconomies of scale occur when there is an increase in the average cost due to 
internal or external inefficiencies. Companies increase prices and are then less 
competitive in the market. 
Economies of scale lead to a reduction in the average cost; diseconomies of scale 
result in an increase in the average cost. These concepts help us to understand the cost 
structure and pricing strategies of different organizations and industries. 
If a business is developing and growing while its production costs decrease, the 
business has economies of scale and a healthy rate of growth. 
There are two types of economies and diseconomies of scale: internal and external.

Internal economies of scale 
Internal economies of scale assist businesses in reducing minor expenses or lowering 
the average cost per unit. They allow a business to be efficient and productive. 
Internal economies of scale can be achieved in various ways. 
Managerial economies 
These arise from employing better qualified and trained employees and managers 
who can make quicker and more profitable decisions. Management professionals 
may apply innovative approaches to enhance organizational management and save 
operational costs. 
Financial economies 
Many businesses depend on borrowed capital. The ‘creditworthiness’ of the borrower 
is considered by lenders when determining the rate of interest to be applied to their 
loans. In general, bigger firms enjoy greater creditworthiness than smaller ones, and 
can borrow funds at lower interest rates. They may also have more opportunities to 
raise funds through equity capital. 
By-products 
Higher output results in greater quantities of production waste. When waste production 
exceeds a certain threshold, a business may be able to manufacture specific by-products 
or sell the waste to other businesses to increase revenue. A company will be unable to use 
this waste to generate revenue if it doesn’t produce enough waste. 
Technical economies 
Large companies can utilize complex machinery more efficiently, resulting in 
increased productivity and reduced average costs. Different inputs, specifically 
machines and equipment, require periodic maintenance and repairs. A small-scale 
business may not be able to quickly locate a replacement for a machine that breaks 
down or is unable to function, which negatively affects production. 
Economies of inventory management 
A larger company is better able to alter its input and finished product inventories so 
that any discrepancies between flows of production and sales are reduced. 
Marketing economies 
A big corporation benefits from bulk purchasing and sales. As a result, it can procure 
its inputs at discounted prices. Similarly, on account of bulk selling, its average selling 
costs come down. In addition, its size gives it better bargaining strength. 
Advertising 
An uncompetitive business must engage in several actions to increase sales, 
with advertising playing a key role in these efforts. A small firm may not be able to 
afford advertising because advertising must be repeated to be successful. An increased 
advertising budget means that a firm can use the most effective media in the right 
proportions to target customers. As a result, its per-unit advertising expenses come 
down. 

38 
Introduction to business management 
Risk economies 
A large company can diversify its product lines to lower the average risk it faces. This is 
because not all product lines are likely to experience losses at the same time. The firm 
can compensate for losses from some lines with profits from other lines. 
Internal diseconomies of scale 
Internal diseconomies of scale result in an increased average cost of production. 
Organizational diseconomies 
There are many causes of organizational diseconomies of scale. Managing a 
large workforce can result in a decline of effective communication: it becomes 
challenging for management to communicate and give directions within the growing 
organization. Larger organizations run the risk of isolating staff members and making 
them feel unappreciated and demotivated, which can reduce productivity. Lack of 
communication, control, and motivation cause diseconomies of scale by increasing 
the average cost of production in large organizations. 
Technical diseconomies 
Technical diseconomies of scale are caused by inefficiencies in the production 
process. Overcrowding in a manufacturing facility can result in poor work 
conditions and thus reduces productivity. A lack of equipment and resources 
may also result in reduced production. A new facility may have a less efficient 
production process, with employees needing training and time to familiarize 
themselves with new tools or equipment. 
External economies of scale 
External economies of scale are caused by factors external to the company and which 
impact all the firms in an industry. 
Skilled workforce 
The availability of a skilled workforce in the local community improves productivity 
and reduces the costs of production for a growing company. 
Improved connectivity 
Well-connected infrastructures and transportation systems improve the logistics 
around receiving raw materials and delivering finished products. It helps increase 
productivity and decrease the average cost. 
Business regulations 
Favorable business laws support the growth of a company and can increase the 
productivity. 
External diseconomies of scale 
Diseconomies of scale can be caused by external factors that are not under a company’s 
control. They negatively impact productivity and increase the cost of production. 
Competition for scarce resources 
Competition for resources increases the cost of materials as well as labor costs. A 
limited supply of suitable business properties will result in increased rent and will 
increase the cost of production.

Traffic congestion 
The growth of a large company can increase the size of the local community, resulting 
in increased traffic. It disrupts mobility in the labor and delivery markets. It reduces 
production while increasing the cost of production. 
Internal growth 
Internal, or organic growth, occurs when a business decides to expand its activities by 
launching new products and/or entering new markets. Businesses expand by internal 
growth to improve their chances of increasing their customers, revenues, and profits. 
Internal growth allows an organization to have control of its business. 
Opening new stores 
A company might open new stores locally or globally. If the company can find an 
appropriate location and has the capital to invest in a new store, this is a relatively low- 
risk option. 
E-commerce 
E-commerce involves sales of goods and services online. The COVID-19 pandemic led 
to a surge in e-commerce. Almost all established businesses have an online presence. 
Selling online allows a company to reach new customers in different countries and 
increase its market share. 
Outsourcing 
Outsourcing is when a company uses workers from outside the company to do a 
job. This allows the company to grow its capacity quickly and cheaply. For example, 
a cereal manufacturer could meet an increase in demand by asking another cereal 
manufacturer to produce its products. However, the business will not have as much 
control, and its reputation could be damaged if the products aren’t the same quality. 
Advantages of internal growth include: 
o 
Itis relatively low risk. 
* A business can maintain its vision and mission. 
» 
Higher output enables the company to take advantage of economies of scale and 
reduce average cost. 
Disadvantages of internal growth include: 
 Itis relatively slow. 
* The time between an investment and the investment’s return may be 
considerable. 
* 
Growth could be constrained and will depend on the accuracy of the growth 
method’s sales projections. 
External growth 
External growth (also known as inorganic growth) occurs when a company increases 
its capacity by buying other companies, rather than from its own operations. 
Internal growth and external growth are not mutually exclusive. The primary benefit 
of external growth over internal growth is that it offers a quicker means of business 
Traffic congestion negativ 
impacts the supply chain 
39

40 
Introduction to business management 
expansion. However, organic growth is often thought to be a stronger indicator of 
a 
company’s performance. 
A company might choose a merger, an acquisition, or a strategic alliance as a way to 
grow. The main difference between mergers and acquisitions (M&As) and strategic 
alliances concerns a change of ownership. M&As transactions move the ownership 
from one company to another. A strategic alliance enables companies to work toward 
shared goals while continuing to exist as separate entities. 
Mergers and acquisitions 
M&As refers to transactions between business entities that involve a change of 
ownership. A financial transaction known as a merger occurs when two businesses 
combine into one new business with the consent of both boards of directors. In a 
merger, the companies may create a completely new entity (under 
a new brand name), 
or the acquired company may become a part of the acquiring company. 
An acquisition is a financial transaction in which the acquiring company (the bidder) 
purchases a controlling stake in a target company. It may be carried out with the 
approval of the target company’s management and shareholders (a friendly takeover), 
or without their consent (a hostile takeover). In general, M&As transactions can offer 
the participating firms significant advantages and prospects for growth. However, 
integrating companies following a merger or acquisition is a complex process. 
Companies must evaluate the future benefits of carrying out mergers and acquisition. 
After M&As, companies may need to be reorganized, and new responsibilities will 
be assigned. It might impact the culture of the organization and the motivation of 
existing employees. 
Case study - Spirit Airlines merger 
In June 2022, a New York Times article reported that Institutional Shareholder 
Services (ISS) had advised Spirit Airlines’ investors to vote in favor of a proposed 
merger with Frontier Airlines over a competing bid from JetBlue Airways. Many 
large US corporations value ISS's opinions on corporate issues. 
JetBlue had increased its all-cash offer earlier to a total of about $3.7 billion. This 
was followed by Frontier increasing its cash offer to around $2.7 billion. Though 
initially less valuable, Frontier offered a rise in share when the combined company 
generates higher profits, making it more likely to win regulatory approval. 
Airline analysts favored a merger between Spirit and Frontier due to their similar 
low-cost business models with different geographical strengths. US President Joe 
Biden’s revised administrative reforms on antitrust binds both proposals to offer 
a $350 million ‘reverse termination fee’ to Spirit, and an upfront cash payment to 
shareholders. 
Spirit and Frontier announced their merger in February 2022. JetBlue’s counter 
bid was criticized by Spirit and Frontier, with the expectation that it wouldn’t be 
approved by antitrust regulators and is a ‘cynical attempt’ to disrupt the merger.

Case study - Clif Bar & Company 
Mondelez International, the owner of Oreo, Toblerone, 
Milka, and Cadbury announced plans to acquire Clif 
Bar & Company, a US manufacturer of energy bars, for 
$2.9 billion. Mondelez plans to continue manufacturing 
Clif's products in [daho, Indiana, and California. 
Mondelez believes this acquisition will bring its snack bar worth to over $1 billion. 
Mondelez, which also owns international brands Daim, Ritz, and Belvita, recorded 
a net income of about $29 billion in 2021. Clif CEO Sally Grime believes this is the 
best time for the Mondelez partnership to help Clif grow. 
However, Mondelez has warned of higher production costs. It has reduced the 
size of Cadbury chocolate bars, without lowering the price, to absorb some cost 
increases. Other food manufacturers, such as Nestlé, KitKat, and Nesquik, have also 
seen rising manufacturing costs for their products. 
Takeovers 
A takeover typically occurs when one business acquires control and interest in another 
organization by purchasing the majority of that company’s shares. Takeovers of smaller 
companies are usually carried out by larger corporations. A mutual agreement between 
two corporations makes a takeover voluntary. In some cases, offers might be turned 
down, in which case, the larger organization could take control by force. 
Takeovers occur frequently in the corporate sector. Because takeovers integrate two 
businesses, they are comparable to mergers. A merger involves two equal companies. 
A takeover is typically a larger corporation pursuing a smaller one. 
There are a few reasons why businesses might start a takeover. In cases where 
an acquiring corporation believes the target is reasonably priced, it will try an 
opportunistic takeover. Some businesses might choose a strategic takeover, which 
enables the acquirer to enter a new market without investing more time, money, or 
risk. A strategic takeover may also allow the acquirer to reduce competition. 
A friendly takeover usually works because all parties agree. In such cases, the deal has 
the support of the target firm's management. However, when one party is not a willing 
participant, it can result in an unwelcome or hostile takeover. The purchasing company 
may use undesirable strategies, such as a ‘dawn attack’, whereby it purchases a sizable 
stake in the target company as soon as the markets open, taking control before the target 
is even aware of what is happening. When more than 50 per cent of shares are purchased, 
control of the organization will pass to the purchasing company. The target company’s 
management and board of directors have the power to thwart takeover efforts by using 
strategies like a ‘poison pill'. This enables target company owners to purchase additional 
shares at a reduced price, diluting the acquirer’s stake and raising the cost of a takeover. 
Joint ventures 
A joint venture is a business activity in which two or more companies have invested 
together for a finite time. Participating companies agree to share revenue, expenses, 
41

42 
Introduction to business management 
and assets. Joint ventures are helpful for businesses that want to start a new project 
with low economic risks. Joint ventures happen usually for small projects, but large 
corporations can use this method to diversify. 
Working with individuals from various firms requires trust to achieve joint objectives. 
When the possibility of a collaboration first presents itself, all parties need to research 
each other and determine whether trust can be achieved and maintained. 
The advantages of this kind of business partnership revolve around the acquisition of 
resources (shared) without a (excessive) capital investment. This resource pooling makes 
it easier for businesses to enter new markets, enabling scalable, low-risk business growth. 
Joint ventures offer a great deal of flexibility. To produce the venture’s collaborative 
product, participants do not need to establish new corporate entities. The partners 
are not obligated to work together after the initial partnership agreement expires; 
each company maintains its individuality and autonomy, and is free to engage in 
independent economic ventures. Joint venture agreements streamline company 
innovation while lowering its risks. 
A joint venture is a good way to enter a new geographic market or increase awareness 
among a particular target demographic. Joint ventures can also be helpful for gaining 
technical know-how or intellectual property, or for enhancing the advertising and 
marketing plans of each business. 
Joint ventures can be the only way for some companies to enter overseas markets due 
to government regulations. Conflicts between the companies may arise if there are 
different management styles and company cultures. 
Case study - Volkswagen and Horizon Robotics 
According to a 2022 article by Macau Business, Volkswagen, the German auto 
giant, is investing $2.3 billion in a joint venture with The People’s Republic of 
China’s Horizon Robotics. Both companies want to speed up the development of 
automated driving solutions for the Chinese market. 
Volkswagen has long invested in The People’s Republic of China as part of its shift 
to electric cars and has already established several joint ventures there, notably in 
the battery industry. 
Strategic alliances 
Strategic alliances are formed as part of a formal agreement between two or more 
organizations to work together to achieve common business objectives. Strategic 
alliances, unlike M&As deals, don't include any transfer of ownership between the 
participating businesses. Instead, businesses work together for a defined period to share 
their resources and knowledge in order to increase their competitiveness in an industry 
while maintaining their independence. The two main types of strategic alliances are 
equity and non-equity alliances. Equity alliances are formed when separate businesses 
join forces and create a new company that is co-owned by the participating partners. 
An equity alliance’s most typical manifestation is a joint venture.

Non-equity relationships are established through contracts. License agreements are 
examples of non-equity alliances where one firm sells goods, services, or intellectual 
property to another company in return for a fee. 
Strategic alliances, as opposed to M&As deals, are significantly simpler to carry out 
and do not require a high level of commitment from the parties involved. However, 
compared to the opportunities that an acquisition may present, the advantages and 
growth chances of strategic alliances may be constrained. A strategic alliance can fail 
because of diverging objectives and a changing external environment, or due to rivalry 
between the partners. 
Case study - Oman Air 
Oman Air will join the Oneworld airline alliance in 2024. After an announcement 
at IATA’s 78th annual meeting at Doha, Qatar Airways was chosen to sponsor the 
airline and mentor it to help integrate with Oneworld. In May 2021, Akbar Al Baker, 
the group CEO of Qatar Airways, was appointed by Oneworld to lead the governing 
board of the airline alliance. 
After Oman Air joins the alliance in 2024, users of the carrier’s Sindbad frequent 
flier program will be able to accrue and use points on any member airline of the 
alliance. Oman Air brings three new locations to Oneworld: Khasab and Dugm 
in Oman, and Chittagong in Bangladesh. Oman Air lounges will be available to 
Oneworld Emerald, Oneworld Sapphire, and premium cabin passengers in Muscat, 
Salalah, and Bangkok. Akbar Al Baker welcomed the alliance’s new members 
in a press conference mentioning that Oman Air will provide seamless travel 
arrangements for its passengers, connecting them to more than 900 locations in 170 
nations. 
Franchising 
Franchising is a method of external growth where one business sells the right to use 
its brand name and sell its products to another business. The product and process 
need to be scalable. In exchange for a fee and royalties, a franchisor sells a franchise. 
A franchisee is someone who purchases a franchise and can use an established brand 
name and its products. 
Advantages of franchising 
Benefits for franchisors include: 
* 
Increased growth with less risk: Faster expansion, reaching more customers 
in competitive markets, is possible with a lower level of risk than other ways of 
expansion. 
» Economies of scale: The business can achieve cost savings by expanding. 
« 
Increased revenue: The franchisor receives an upfront fee as well as a portion of 
the profits generated by each outlet. 
 Fostering motivation: Each store owner will be running their own business and 
keeping most of the profit, meaning they are more motivated than if they were 
just the manager of the store. 
43

= 
Introduction to business management 
For the franchisee, an existing brand, training from the franchisor, shared marketing 
expenses, access to suppliers, and access to a network of other franchisees are all 
benefits of purchasing a franchise. Franchisees also benefit from ongoing support, and 
brand and product development. 
Disadvantages of franchising 
By selling a franchise, franchisors risk losing control of the company and the 
possibility that the reputation of the brand could be harmed. 
Franchisees must pay substantial setup costs and split the earnings (in the form of 
royalties). They have less control over what they sell and how much they charge for it 
than if they weren't running a franchise. 
Advantages of external growth 
* Itisaquick way to grow and access new markets and customers. 
* Itcan quickly increase a company’s market share. 
e 
[t can reduce costs and achieve economies of scale faster. 
Disadvantages of external growth 
* External growth can dilute the ownership and result in loss of control. 
» 
It canbe costly. 
* Managers might not have the expertise in and knowledge of external growth 
methods, which can lead to business failure. 
Reasons for growth 
Growth may enable an organization to: 
* 
take advantage of new opportunities 
» expand products or services 
* 
attract more customers 
* 
increase sales 
» employ more staff 
* benefit from economies of scale to improve competitiveness 
» respond to market demand 
* 
increase market share 
* 
capitalize on its growing brand. 
Growth often also encourages innovation, enabling a business to stand out in its 
industry and become more competitive. 
Advantages of growth 
Growth and expansion of an organization has several advantages: 
 Increased profits: Almost every business owner’s ultimate goal is to increase 
profits, which they can accomplish by growing the company. 
* Economies of scale: With an increase in business, the average cost of operations 
lowers, which is a competitive advantage in the market. 
* Larger market share: The expansion in the business makes it possible to capture 
a larger share of the market.

Growth can also increase stability and earnings while expanding the supplier base and 
a company’s credibility. 
For growth to be effective and long-lasting, it must be purposeful and motivated by 
the appropriate factors. Companies should evaluate whether their business model 
is scalable before deciding to grow the company. Most firms expand to grow larger, 
whether because of rising sales or market share, but size isn’t always the primary factor. 
Growth can give an organization: 
« 
greater sustainability or resilience in the market 
» 
greater buying and bargaining power 
» 
the ability to reduce commercial risks (for example, through diversification) 
» 
the ability to reduce the threat of competition 
« 
the ability to survive market fluctuations and downturns 
s 
the ability to recruit top talent. 
However, business owners must remember that taking steps that promote growth may 
not be feasible or pragmatic for all businesses. Some businesses have failed to reach 
their desired outcomes and profits due to premature growth decisions. But, in most 
cases, not moving forward is more likely to lead to loss through missed opportunities. 
Disadvantages of growth 
Growth and expansion can, however, have disadvantages: 
« 
Large companies have many layers of management, which can result in a loss of 
control and communication problems. 
* 
Increases in production can reduce the quality of 
a product. 
* 
Increased need for capital can result in cashflow problems. 
Case study - Infosys 
Infosys is the second-largest IT firm in India. Non-executive chair Nandan Nilekani 
states that inflation, rising interest rates, slow growth, and disrupted supply chains 
have been a post-pandemic challenge. However, the pandemic has also led to new 
opportunities to gain market share; Infosys grew by 19.7 per cent in 2022, with 
$3.1 billion of dividends and share buybacks transferred to shareholders. 
To improve growth, Infosys has introduced five strategic elements: 
+ 
scaleits cloud business 
* 
maintain its intensity in current markets 
» expand in Europe 
* 
advance in new technology, such as the metaverse and Web 3.0 
+ 
advance automation and modernization. 
CEO Salil sees plenty of opportunities in the digital and cloud spaces; he expects 
the well-positioned company to continue to grow its market shares and benefit its 
stakeholders. 
45

Does competition between 
companies help or 
hinder the production of 
knowledge? 
Conceptual understanding: 
Change and business 
What is the relationship 
between advances in 
technology and change? How 
does technology influence 
change and growth in a 
business? 
46 
Introduction to business management 
Reasons for businesses to stay small 
Although growth is important for many businesses, some businesses may decide to 
stay small. 
Type of industry 
Some business sectors or industries that provide services to the local market stay small 
for their entire existence, or for a long time. For example, hairdressers, convenience 
stores, and car wash services. These businesses usually offer personal services and 
don’t want to offer their services beyond their local market. 
Market size 
The market size for expensive and specialized products is small. Therefore, 
companies that offer these products also stay small. For example, there are very few 
buyers of luxury cars around the world, so manufacturers of luxury cars have limited 
customers and a smaller market share than manufacturers of popular small and 
family-sized cars. 
Business objectives 
Sometimes a business owner doesn’t want to increase the size of their business. 
They intentionally stay small. They might want to exert great control over the 
company or stay away from the pressures of large corporations. Owners may focus 
on staying close to employees and customers instead of increasing the size of their 
company. 
Advantages of staying small 
There are advantages to a business that decides not to grow: 
* 
Smaller companies have more control and decision power. 
* Smaller companies can customize the product according to the needs of 
customers and can target niche markets. 
» 
Operating costs are lower, and companies have more control over their 
cashflow. 
Disadvantage of staying small 
[f 
a company decides to stay small, it may miss opportunities and will not have access 
to the advantages in the market than larger organizations have. 
Activity 
What ethical questions do businesses face when they make job cuts or close 
factories? 
Review case studies of international companies reducing or closing factories in various 
countries, then evaluate those companies’ business needs in a balanced manner. 
By reflecting on the impacts of companies’ decisions, evaluate the importance of 
running a socially responsible business.

Practice questions 
In 2011, British Airways merged with Iberia, 
and Air France merged with KLM. Both 
mergers resulted in some significant benefits. 
Ryanair is planning a £560 million takeover 
of the Irish airline, Aer Lingus, which has 
failed to deliver shareholder dividends. One 
shareholder, the Irish government, owns 
25 per cent of the shares of Aer Lingus. 
Ryanair’s chief executive officer (CEO) said that the proposed takeover could create: 
* revenue and a positive return for the Irish government by selling its shares 
* astrong Irish airline capable of competing with major European airlines. 
This form of external growth is also occurring in the US. American Airlines and US 
Airways will merge, forming the nation’s biggest airline, to be called American. 
Airline analysts argue that mergers are necessary to reduce financial uncertainty 
and restore stability to an industry that has lost about $60 billion in ten years. 
Large airlines with big networks can invest in new airplanes, new routes and better 
facilities, and provide passengers with more travel options. Mergers are likely 
to increase operational and financial efficiencies, and create economies of scale. 
Airline analysts, favoring airline mergers, emphasize that each merger must be 
approved by appropriate national and international regulatory agencies to ensure 
that the competitive nature of the industry is maintained. 
Other analysts, however, argue that: 
* 
large airlines make it difficult for smaller rivals to compete and, in the long run, 
reduce competition — this may lead to higher fares and a poorer service 
* 
Dbeing larger may not make airlines globally competitive — some national 
governments restrict operation of foreign airlines within their countries, 
which allows a local airline monopoly to exist 
+ 
strategic decisions are difficult to implement as companies grow 
+ 
largeris not always better. 
1 
Describe one difference between a merger and a takeover. 
(2 marks) 
Define the term ‘economies of scale’. 
(2 marks) 
3 With reference to the airline industry, explain two differences 
between external growth and internal growth. 
(6 marks) 
4 Examine the Irish government’s decision to own 25 per cent of 
Aer Lingus shares. 
(6 marks) 
5 With reference to one internal stakeholder and one external 
stakeholder, discuss the statement that ‘larger is not always better’ 
from the perspective of the airline industry. 
(9 marks) 
6 Discuss the merits of small organizations compared to large 
organizations. 
(10 marks) 
47

