48 
Introduction to business management 
1.6 Multinational companies (MNCs) 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
evaluate the impact of multinational companies (MNCs) on their host countries. 
Multinational companies (MNCs) are organizations that operate in more than one 
country. A host country is where a company based in another country has business 
activities. Globalization has resulted in the increasing expansion of operations of large 
organizations into more than one country. 
MNCs are important to host countries for several reasons. MNCs influence economic 
development by providing capital investment, employment, and training opportunities 
for the local market. The presence of MNCs in host countries raises the GDP of host 
countries, which then positively impacts the local economy. MNCs may pay higher 
salaries to their employees than local companies, which makes them more attractive to 
the local labor force. 
Local producers and suppliers also benefit economically from the presence of MNCs. 
They provide services, parts, finished goods, and raw materials, which increase 
employment and their revenue. MNCs also improve the knowledge and skills of 
the host labor force. Due to the large number of products they produce and sell, 
multinational firms usually need to invest in the transportation and communication 
networks of 
a host nation. Local companies and the workforce can take advantage of 
the latest and innovative technologies employed by MNCs. 
MNCs entering the global market can lead to healthy competition among local 
companies in the host nation by boosting quality and/or efficiency. MNCs provide 
more product options in the local market. MNCs can also improve the global outlook 
of the host nations. 
International enterprises prefer to enter countries with favorable market conditions 
and low market risk. If a well-known MNC enters a certain host market, then other 
global corporations may locate in the same host county. 
Although there are huge potential benefits for host countries, there are some 
disadvantages. MNCs enter the global market for economic gain and may have little 
sense of corporate social responsibility in the host country. Some host nations’ 
Case study - Dubai International Chamber 
To boost its status as a hub for international trade, Dubai has adopted a new 
strategy to attract 50 multinational corporations by the end of 2026. The Dubai 
International Chamber’s three-year strategy will also assist 100 Dubai-based 
businesses in their international growth. 
This strategy aims to improve the business climate in Dubai, and also aims to 
encourage and promote multinational corporations to list on the Dubai Financial 
Market (DFM) and boost Dubai’s non-oil foreign trade to Dh.2 trillion.

The new strategy enables the Dubai International Chamber to market Dubai 
more successfully as a top international business hub and draw top multinational 
corporations to the emirate, which will then be able to increase its competitiveness 
in industries like trade, infrastructure, logistics, the digital economy, retail, and 
manufacturing. 
" 
7 
AN 
._R,u 
N 
) 
L 
T 
TR T 
T 
T 
T 
BT TR T 
limited natural resources have been severely depleted through the actions of large 
multinational corporations. 
A host country government might relax environmental laws for MNCs, enabling 
MN(Cs to contribute to carbon emissions and to worsen the climate crisis. MNCs 
might manipulate the rules and regulations of the host country to gain economic 
advantages. Multinational corporations can invest hundreds of millions of US dollars 
in a host country, and may attempt to influence government policies in exchange 
for such investment. MNCs might buy products from local suppliers at a cheap 
b 
fan iR arel 
rate and then sell their own products at much higher rates to the local community. 
companies leverage 
MNCs might create a monopoly in the host country. Local businesses might not have 
knowledge of a host 
enough resources and will not be able to compete with MNCs, resulting in the local 
qouniry's culture to 
increase their profit there? 
How can businesses find 
out about a country's 
culture? 
organization’s failure. 
Activity 
The trend of globalization in the business world brings multinational corporations 
into more communities. New customer demands, new competitors, new 
technologies, new legislations, and other changes significantly impact local 
businesses. Evaluate how the change of external environment affects local 
communities ethically. 
49

IB learner profile 
Risk-takers 
Utilize business knowledge 
and understanding to develop 
and present creative business 
condlusions/recommendations 
for a real-world organization 
of your choice about how 
that organization can leverage 
knowledge of a host country's 
culture to increase its profit in 
that country. 
50 
Introduction to business management 
Summary 
In this unit, you have learned: 
* 
Abusiness identifies a need (or want) in a market and then produces goods or 
services to meet that need. 
* Businesses operate in either the private sector or the public sector. 
* There are three main types of firms: sole trader, partnership, and limited company. 
* 
Abusiness uses vision statements, mission statements, and objectives to develop 
and grow. 
* 
Internal and external stakeholders influence an organization’s decisions and actions. 
» Companies can take advantage of economies of scale to reduce costs and increase 
profits. 
* Businesses can grow organically, or by merging with or taking over other 
companies. 
* 
Multinational corporations are based in one country but have operations in others, 
often to take advantage of lower production costs.

Human resource 
management 

