Human resource management 
Conceptual understandings 
* People play a major role in driving organizational change. 
 Creative employees could be essential for business success. 
* 
Ethical human resource systems may positively affect employee performance. 
* 
Sustainable human behavior can bring positive change in a business. 
2.1 Introduction to human resource management 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
¢ 
define human resource management 
. 
outline the common steps in the recruitment and selection process 
» 
identify the internal and external factors that influence human resource 
planning 
* 
suggest reasons why employees may resist change in a business organization 
* examine the human resource strategies to reduce the impact of, and resistance 
to, change. 
These are questions based on themes within this unit that you could conduct some 
independent research about. You could explore: 
» How could technological advancement help businesses to manage their human 
resources department in a more efficient way? 
» Why are ethical and sustainable organizations more likely to recruit top talent 
and have higher employee retention? 
The role of human resource management 
Human resource management (HRM) fulfills an essential role in the modern business 
environment. It is the process of employing and training people, compensating them, 
developing policies relating to them, and developing strategies to retain them. 
Although HRM often forms its own functional area, it is important to recognize that 
every manager has some role relating to HRM. For example, most managers will deal 
with motivation, compensation, and retention of employees. 
The key functions of HRM are: 
»  Workforce planning 
* 
 Performance management 
* Recruitment, selection, and induction 
and appraisal 
» Compensation and benefits 
* 
Employee relations 
management (financial and 
* 
 Worker health and safety 
non-financial rewards) 
s 
Dismissal and redundancies. 
* 
Professional development and training

Workforce planning 
Workforce planning is the process of analyzing, forecasting, and planning workforce 
supply and demand, assessing gaps, and determining target talent management 
interventions to ensure that an organization has the right people (who have the right 
skills in the right places at the right time) to meet its strategic objectives. 
Monitoring 
PIOBIESS 
What are 
the phases of 
workforce planning? 
Supply 
analysis 
Recruitment, selection, and induction 
Recruitment and hiring new talent is one of the most important HR functions. It 
involves a number of crucial activities, outlined in Figure 2.2. 
Job vacancies in the organization will be identified in the HR plan as a result of 
changes in internal or external factors. Following this, the HR department will conduct 
a job analysis and evaluation, before formulating the job description and person 
specification that will be shared with potential applicants. 
The organization needs to decide on how to find and attract the best candidates for the 
job. This will involve careful consideration of where the job advert is placed, ensuring 
that the people they want to apply will see it. They may facilitate this process internally 
through the HR team or use an outside recruitment agency. 
On receipt of applications, a screening process begins, and at this point, 
candidates are narrowed down through shortlisting. Shortlisted applicants will 
then be invited to interview. Candidates may be asked to complete some form 
of test alongside the interview. Aptitude tests (task oriented activities) and 
psychometric tests (personality questionnaires) are common. The interview can 
take a variety of forms: one-to-one, a panel (with multiple interviewers), video 
conference (online), multi-day (conducted over several days), or staged (where 
success in one stage leads to the next). 
< Figure 2.1 
The six phases 
of workforce planning 
The recruitment process 
should be done with proper 
strategic planning 
53

Figure2.2 The recruitment 
and selection process 
54 
1. 
Vacancy 
Analysis 
of job 
8. 
Evaluate new 
employee 
7. 
: 
Induction & 
Recruitment 
Ei 
and 
candidates 
selection process 
training 
6. 
Choose 
4. 
Applications 
candidate 
screened 
5 
Interviews 
Once the successful candidate has been selected, they will be presented with a job offer 
and associated remuneration package. When new employees start at an organization, 
they undergo an induction and training program that helps orientate them with 
the workplace and expectations of the job role. The HR department may support 
employee evaluations at the end of the training period. 
Performance management 
Performance management describes activities that establish objectives through which 
individuals and teams can see their part in the organization’s mission and strategy. It aims 
to improve employee performance, and to hold employees to account for that performance, 
by linking performance to reward, career progression, and continued employment. 
An appraisal system can be used as the framework to manage performance. Often 
reviewed on an annual basis, targets will be set at the start of the appraisal cycle and 
progress against them monitored throughout the year. Appraisal can flow both ways 
in a business environment; it is not uncommon for employees to feed back on their 
managers’ performance. 
Common forms of appraisal include: 
+ Formative: Documented appraisal sessions at regular intervals throughout 
the term of an employee’s contract, used to assess what is going well and how 
performance can be improved. 
* Summative: A concluding appraisal at the end of a set period, summarizing the 
performance of the employee against their targets.

» 
360-degree feedback: An appraisal method that draws on feedback from 
colleagues and/or customers, given through a questionnaire. 
Is it inevitable that the 
implicit biases of the 
+ 
Self-appraisal: Employees self-assess their own performance and rate themselves 
interviewer will influence 
the outcome of interviews? 
against their key performance indicators. 
Compensation and benefits management (financial and 
non-financial rewards) 
This function includes establishing salary ranges for job roles and placing employees in 
the relevant salary band based on their qualifications, experience, and achievements. The 
HR team will need to ensure they keep up to date with current labor market trends and 
benchmark the remuneration packages against the going market rate for similar job roles 
and responsibilities in the industry. The HR department is also responsible for monitoring 
the wider benefits package, such as annual leave entitlement and healthcare provision. 
Professional development and training 
The HR department oversees the organization and provision of training and 
development. Types of training and development include the following. 
On-the-job training is delivered while an individual is performing tasks or processes 
related to their particular occupation. This type of training is typically used to broaden 
an employee’s skill set and to increase productivity. 
Off-the-job training refers to an education method where employees learn more about 
their 
job or the latest advancements in their field at a location away from their workplace. 
Behavioral training is adopted by some businesses to develop skills and abilities that 
are interpersonal, regulatory, and task-related, and that ensure an individual’s good 
performance in professional settings. 
« Figure2.3 Theltopten 
Communication | Conflict resolution |Self-improvement | Time 
Stress 
A 
e 
T 
behavioral skills that employers 
management) management 
like their employees to have 
Patience 
Balance between 
|Empathy 
Decision- 
 |Problem 
professional and 
making 
solving 
personal life 
Cognitive training aims to improve the skills the brain uses to think, read, learn, 
remember, reason, and pay attention. Developing cognitive skills in the workplace 
helps employees to understand and process new information. 
Choose a job role and explore what behavioral and cognitive skills are needed to 
work successfully in that industry/environment. Present your findings to your 
classmates, using real world examples of situations that would bring the behavioral 
and cognitive skills into play for your chosen job role. 
Employee relations 
Maintaining positive relationships with employees ensures that a pleasant work 
environment is created, which should lead to increased levels of productivity. 
93]

56 
Worker health and safety 
Providing a safe, healthy work environment is a critical function of HRM. It includes 
tasks such as creating safety guidelines, providing employee wellness programs, 
and conducting emergency planning. Many insurers provide discounts on workers’ 
compensation and other business coverage to employers who implement safety 
programs. Wellness programs may reduce healthcare premiums. 
Dismissals and redundancies 
The HR department oversees dismissals and redundancies in the workplace. A dismissal 
happens when the employer terminates a contract due to the employee’s actions. The HR 
department ensures the dismissal is fair, otherwise it can be challenged at a tribunal. A 
redundancy is a type of dismissal when the job role is no longer needed. 
Internal and external factors that influence human 
resource planning 
A variety of factors can affect an organization’s HR plan. Changes within the business 
can mean internal factors are an influence, whereas external factors can affect the 
pool of labor available for employment. 
Internal factors 
Internal factors arise out of the business itself and can lead to a review of the HR plan. 
+ Change in business organization: The need to change how a business is 
organized in order to better meet its strategic objectives can impact on HR 
planning. Acquisitions and mergers will also influence organizational changes. 
 Change in business strategy: The business environment is ever-changing, and 
businesses often need to review, revise, and implement new strategies in response 
to market conditions. The HR plan can be impacted by the identification of new 
roles needed, as well as the realization that existing roles may become redundant. 
 Change in business profitability: Levels of profitability and the overall financial 
position of a business will be a key influence on the HR plan. Low levels of profitability 
will hinder a business’ ability to offer competitive remuneration packages, which will 
affect recruitment and retention. Increasing profitability will allow the business to 
expand its workforce, offer better salaries, and attract high quality candidates. 
» Change in labor relations: Relations between employer and employees can be 
influenced by the decision to unionize. This would require a reconsideration of 
the HR plan in line with union requirements and work conditions. If existing trade 
union power reduces, this could add a degree of flexibility to the business in dealing 
with the workforce. 
External factors 
External factors are things outside the business that can impact the HR plan and the 
functioning of the business. 
* Demographic change/immigration: Falling birth rates, an aging population, or 
rising net migration levels can impact the number of potential employees available 
in the labor pool.

 Technological change: Improvements in technology can lead to more remote 
working. It has become increasingly common over recent years for businesses 
to add video conferencing and remote working technology to their everyday 
practices. The rise of social networking may also change the way businesses 
communicate with employees. 
* Government regulations: Changes in government legislation or regulations in 
relation to health and safety in the workplace, weekly working hours, retirement 
age, pensions, and equality in relation to age, gender, ethnicity, or disability can all 
impact on HR planning. 
Case study - UAE cuts working week to four-and-a-half days 
An article in The Guardian newspaper reported that the United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
government had announced in December 2021 that it planned to cut the working 
week to four-and-a-half days and move the weekend from Friday—Saturday to 
Saturday—Sunday, in a move aimed at improving the country’s competitiveness. 
The ‘national working week’ came into force from 1 January 2022 and is now 
mandatory for government bodies, which goes against the norm for the region of a 
full day off on Friday for Muslim prayers. 
Although the UAE became the only Gulf state not to have a Friday—Saturday 
weekend, the move brought the resource-rich and ambitious UAE into line with the 
wider world. In doing so, the UAE became the first nation to introduce a national 
working week shorter than the global five-day week. 
At the time, WAM, the state news agency said, From an economic perspective, the 
new working week will better align the UAE with global markets, reflecting the 
country’s strategic status on the global economic map. 
‘It will ensure smooth financial, trade, and economic transactions with countries 
that follow a Saturday—Sunday weekend, facilitating stronger international business 
links and opportunities for thousands of UAE-based and multinational companies.’ 
Analyze the likely impacts for the HR departments of UAE businesses following the 
decision to move to a four-and-a-half day working week. 
o/

Toolkit connection 
Descriptive statistics assist 
a business in its decisions 
regarding a particular venture 
or strategy. Numerical data 
can be used to create bar 
graphs, pie charts, and 
infographics to provide a 
visualization of the data. 
Human resource management 
* Socio-cultural trends: Changes in society can impact on HR planning, including 
changing family structures and gender roles, increased emphasis on employee well- 
being and the value of leisure time, and the need for flexible working. 
» The state of the economy: Fluctuations in the business cycle influence the 
number of people available for work. During times of recession, unemployment 
levels rise, increasing the supply of labor and putting a downward pressure on wage 
rates. Conversely, in times of economic growth, the demand for labor increases, 
and as firms compete for potential employees, wage rates are pushed up. 
* Labor mobility: Occupational mobility refers to the ease with which people can change 
jobs. Geographic mobility refers to changing locations. Both factors influence the overall 
labor mobility of the workforce and significantly impact the labor pool of the country. 
* Emerging industries: Industries experiencing above-average growth levels must 
hire additional staff at a rapid pace. In 2021, Forbes identified artificial intelligence, 
virtual reality, renewable and alternative energy, big data analytics, cyber security, 
and cloud computing as six of the biggest emerging industries for investment. 
* Gig economy: The UK government describes the gig economy as one that 
‘involves the exchange of labor for money between individuals or companies via 
digital platforms that actively facilitate matching between providers and customers, 
on a short-term and payment-by-task basis’. Millions of people balance various 
income streams and work independently, job-by-job. 
Activity 
Investigate the rise of the gig economy in your local context. McKinsey & Company 
have suggested that independent workers (a large part of the gig economy) fall into 
four main categories. The chart shows the share of the working-age population that 
is engaged in independent work. 
Primary income 
Supplemental income 
Preferred 
Free agents 
Casual earners 
choice 
30% | 49 million 
40% 
| 64 million 
Out of_ 
Reluctants 
Financially strapped 
necessity 
14% | 23 million 
16% 
| 26 million 
Using the categories proposed by McKinsey & Company, what type of independent 
work has been on the increase and why? Which digital platforms are being used 
to facilitate this? What are the typical earnings that can be expected for the type of 
independent work you have chosen to explore? 
Investigate the rise of the gig economy in your local context. What type of 
independent work has been on the increase and which digital platforms are being 
used to facilitate this? What are the typical earnings for the type of independent 
work you have chosen to explore?

Reasons for resistance to change in the workplace 
Change can be unsettling for people, regardless of the scenario, and this is no different 
in the workplace. It is not uncommon for managers to come up against resistance from 
employees when looking to implement changes that may upset the status quo. 
There are many reasons why employees may push back against change, including the 
following. 
Loss of job security 
If employees think that their job may be at risk because of the change in the current work 
situation, then this may cause fear and anxiety over their job security. In an organizational 
environment, this means that employees will resist change that will result in their role 
being eliminated or reduced, especially if they are not involved in the decision. 
Prior change experience 
Prior experiences will influence the way people respond to different situations. If 
employees have had negative experiences of change in the past, this can make them 
resistant to workplace change. In addition, if the organization has managed change 
poorly in the past, employees will struggle to get on board and are likely to resist. 
Poor rewards systems 
When faced with change, employees will ask ‘How does this benefit me?’ If the answer is 
unclear or no benefit is articulated, then they will resist the change. The business will need to 
reward them in some way for implementing the change. Without a reward or clear benefits 
to the change, employees will lack motivation to support the change over the long term. 
Surprise and fear of the unknown 
If there is a lack of transparency and timely communication to employees about 
changes being made and the impact of those changes, the more fearful employees will 
become. Resistance to change out of fear of the unknown can occur if employees are 
not adequately informed and prepared. 
Loss of control 
Employees often establish a familiar routine in the work environment, helping 
to establish a sense of control. Change can disrupt these routines and can lead to 
employees feeling confused and out of control, leading them to resist change. 
Fear of failure 
A radical change in a job’s requirements may mean that employees start to question 
their ability to perform their duties. They are comfortable with what they know and 
may fear being unable to adapt to new requirements. 
Not understanding the need for change 
Thinking about what 
It is vital that employees understand why the changes are needed in the workplace. If 
leads employees to resist 
they do not understand the reason behind the change or do not think the change is 
d]:fange ot 
“:torlf;ice 
= 
. 
: 
F 
OfIers an opportunt 
8] 
needed, resistance will occur. If the regular way of working has remained stable for an 
ask whether we ever really 
extended period or there is a strong belief among employees that the current way of 
know what motivates an 
doing things works well, then this is even more important to address. 
employee. 
29

IB learner profile 
Reflective 
Can you recollect a time when 
change has impacted your 
regular weekly schedule? Did 
you resist the change, and if so, 
why? What strategies would 
have made you mare receptive 
to the change taking place? 
Itis important that a business 
clearly communicates the 
need for change to its 
employees 
60 
4 
Mistrust 
Managers must establish the trust of their employees — this is vitally important and 
something that takes time to build up. However, when changes are instigated by a 
new leader who has not developed that same level of trust, mistrust may turn into 
resistance to change. 
Human resource strategies for reducing the impact 
of change and resistance to change 
Understanding why people resist change in the workplace is the first step to helping 
managers overcome it. Having an idea of the key reasons why employees may rebel 
against change means strategies can be developed to overcome this resistance. The 
following six strategies can help reduce the negative impact of change and resistance to it. 
1 Communicating and educating on the change 
Clear communication and education about the change should be initiated before the 
change begins. This communication will help employees to rationalize the change and 
ensure that they receive adequate information to make positive judgments. 
2 Participative strategy 
There is likely to be more resistance if employees are not consulted, and change is 
forced upon them. Therefore, it is important that relevant stakeholders are involved in 
the design of the change. A collaborative effort will engage employees in the change, 
and in the identification of potential issues and solutions. Employees are far less likely 
to resist change that they have helped to create. 
3 Support 
Businesses can offer adequate support to employees throughout the change process. 
Even if people seem to be accepting of change, it may be that they are simply resigned 
to it. Support offered may help to ensure any new skills required are developed and 
change burnout does not occur. 
4 Incentives 
[t may be appropriate for a business to offer incentives to its employees to implement 
proposed changes to overcome the resistance. Incentives may include extra pay, 
improved benefit packages, or structured career plans.

5 Co-opting 
Co-opting is a strategy used to bring those employees most resistant to change into 
central roles in the implementation of change initiatives. Although this can gain the 
favor of the resisting employees, it may provide a platform for them from which to 
inspire greater resistance from a wider audience. 
6 Coercion 
If speed of change is critical, coercion may be the only viable option. Techniques for 
implementing change include the prospect of disciplinary action while insisting that 
people fall into line with required behaviors and actions. 
A major disadvantage of this strategy is that it does not remove resistance to change, 
which may result in a destructive atmosphere later. 
John P Kotter’s eight-step change model 
In his book Leading Change (1996), John P Kotter, a Harvard 
Business School Professor and renowned change expert, 
introduced an eight-step model of change. He developed the 
model through research on 100 organizations that were going 
through the process of change. 
There are three phases to the Kotter change model: 
1 
 Create a climate for change: This phase, which happens first, is about 
creating a shared understanding of the change you want to make and why you 
want to make it. 
2 
Engage and enable the organization: This phase is about engaging your team so 
that they are empowered and enthusiastic to effect change with the organization. 
3 
Implement and sustain: This phase is about pressing ahead after your 
initial successes to build momentum and fully embed the change within your 
organization. 
By following the eight steps outlined below, Kotter believes that organizations have 
more chance of driving through meaningful and lasting changes in the workplace. 
Kotter’s 8-Step Change Model 
i 
Implement & sustain 
Engage & enable 
@ 
the organization 
“\/,  Create climate 
e 
for change 
61

