Human resource management 
Practice questions 
1 
Explain one internal and one external factor that can influence human resource 
planning. 
(4 marks) 
2 Suggest two reasons why employees may be resistant to change in the 
workplace. 
(4 marks) 
3 Inearly 2023, as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic were easing, businesses 
were asking employees to return to the physical office, after many years of 
adopting flexible or home-based working. Disney employees pushed back on 
the company’s announcement that it was returning to four days a week of 
in-person work. 
More than 2,300 workers signed a petition addressed to CEO Bob Iger urging the 
executive to abandon the planned return to offices, claiming it is ‘likely to have 
unintended consequences that cause long-term harm to the company.’ 
At that time, those ‘currently working in a hybrid fashion will be asked to spend 
four days a week on-site, targeting Monday through Thursday as in-person 
workdays,” according to the email. 
He pointed to the ‘tremendous value in being together with the people you work 
with’ as he explained his reasoning for the change, noting he has been holding 
meetings with various teams across Disney since returning to the company. 
Discuss two appropriate strategies Disney could employ to reduce resistance to 
the change. 
(10 marks) 
2.2 Organizational structure 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
» 
construct the various forms of organizational chart and explain their key features 
» 
analyze how changes in organizational structure affect employee performance, 
motivation levels, and flow of communication 
» 
discuss the reasoning behind adopting centralized or decentralized structures. 
» 
examine how a business may change its organizational structure given a change 
in external factors. 
How can creative organizational structures be more suitable in the dynamic 
business world? 
An organizational structure refers to how employees are coordinated and 
communicated with in a business setting. The decision to organize a business in a 
certain way will depend on a variety of factors such as number and type of employees, 
working practices, business environment, and the stage of business development. 
62

A formal organizational structure is one with clearly defined positions, duties, 
responsibilities, and authorities. Within a formal structure, businesses operate within 
a set of rules and procedures. This provides a level of stability to a business in its 
day-to-day operations and should see a more coordinated approach to activities and 
operations, with no ambiguity over who is responsible for what. 
Within this structure, we also start to see informal organization networks appear, with 
interpersonal relationships developing as people interact in the workplace. In these 
member-developed systems, there are often no written rules or clearly defined roles 
and responsibilities for each member. 
The key terms listed in Table 2.1 are used to describe the structure of an organization. 
Table 2.1 Organizational structures: key terms 
Delegation 
When a manager/superior empowers another employee to 
make a particular decision or lead an initiative but maintains the 
overall responsibility for the outcome 
Span of control | The number of people for whom an individual has direct 
authority in a business 
Levels of 
The number of levels of authority within an organization, 
hierarchy 
typically from senior management and executives to general 
employees 
Chain of 
The formal route through which instructions, communication, 
command 
and decisions travel down through an organization 
Bureaucracy 
The range of rules, regulations, and procedures that must be 
followed in an organization 
Centralization | A set-up in which the decision-making powers are concentrated 
in a few leaders at the top of the organizational structure 
Decentralization | The transfer of control of an activity to several managers rather 
than one 
Delayering 
The process of reducing the number of levels in the hierarchy of 
an organization 
Flat versus tall organizational structure 
Organizational structures can be flat (horizontal) or tall (vertical) in nature. 
A flat organizational structure is characterized by limited levels of hierarchy, wider 
spans of control, short chains of command, frequent delegation, and an increased level 
of decentralized decision-making. 
[ 
] 
Levels of 
Chain of 
command 
{ 
T 
[ 
[ 
[ N 
A 
Span of control 
Figure 2.4 A diagram 
| showing 
a flat organizational 
structure 
63

Figure2.5 Adiagam P 
showing a tall organizational 
structure 
Levels of 
hierarchy 
Chain of command 
- 
- 
Span of control 
A tall organizational structure displays more levels of hierarchy, limited delegation, 
narrow spans of control, longer chains of command, and a more centralized approach 
to decision-making. 
Three common ways to arrange an organization are by function, product, or region. 
In a functional structure, an organization is divided by areas of specialty (such 
as finance, marketing, IT, and operations). The management team may consist of 
several functional heads, such as the chief financial officer and the chief operating 
officer. Communication generally occurs within each functional department and is 
transmitted across departments through the department heads. 
The product-based organization structure draws upon the functional approach 
IT departments ensure that 
employees have access to the 
by creating business units within the organization for each major product the 
computer technology they 
company produces. As a result, each product division comprises functional 
need to do their job 
departments to support that product. For example, if 
a company has a food 
division and a homeware division, each of those product-based divisions will have 
its own sales department, marketing department, manufacturing department, 
and other functional groups. Businesses that have distinct product groups that 
require specialized functional teams to support each product are suited to this 
organizational structure. 
Businesses may choose to organize their activities geographically, according to a 
location. For example, it is common for companies to have an Asia division, an 
Americas division, and a Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA) division. Each region 
will have its own management, operations, marketing, sales, and product teams, 
each able to operate according to local customs and demand. The overall direction of 
each region, however, will be directed by the central business. A global CEO, with an 
executive management team, based in the organization’s headquarters, will oversee all 
the regional divisions. 
64

Case study - The IB by region 
The IB works with schools and educators around the world, with representatives in 
three global centers in The Hague, Bethesda, and Singapore, its Foundation Office in 
Geneva, and the Assessment Centre in Cardiff. 
Each global center includes a regional office, which enables the IB to work 
closely with schools and educators, identifying local needs and providing relevant 
services — from professional development services to the authorization of schools 
that implement the IB’s programs. 
The regional offices cover work in: 
* 
Africa, Europe and the Middle East 
+ 
the Americas 
* 
Asia-Pacific. 
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages to the 
IB of organizing its business by region. 
Matrix 
A matrix structure is an organizational structure based on vertical and horizontal 
relationships. Vertical relationships may be based on business function, project, 
product, or region; horizontal relationships tend to be project-based. This structure 
does not follow the traditional hierarchical model. Resources and employees are 
divided by these relationships. For example, an employee reports to two superiors: the 
functional manager and the project manager. 
The matrix structure helps companies to fulfill two goals: maintain existing products, 
and create new, more innovative products and services. In addition, this structure makes 
human resources more flexible because they are accustomed to performing multiple roles. 
However, complexity can create confusion among employees. For example, they must 
report to more than one boss. The potential additional work pressure may become too 
much, resulting in stress and demotivation, especially if the work is not accompanied 
by an adequate compensation package. 
Figure 2.6 A diagram 
(General manager} 
| 
organizational structure 
Project A 
manager 
Project B 
manager 
Project C 
manager 
65

‘Knowledge is power. If 
this saying is true, how 
does it affect different 
stakeholders' abilities to 
contribute to business 
decision-making? 
Figure 2.7 The elements of 
a shamrock organization 
66 
> 
Human resource management 
Appropriateness of different organizational 
structures given a change in external factors 
The business environment is rarely a static one, and businesses need to be ready to 
reflect on the suitability of their current organizational structure when faced with 
changes in external factors, such as: 
* inorganic growth 
* globalization and the move to operating as a multinational 
* changes in legislation 
» 
technological innovations 
* changes in the marketplace. 
Charles Handy’s shamrock organization 
There has been lively discussion on the most appropriate organizational structure for 
the future over the past 30 years. The British management thinker, Charles Handy, 
has been one of the most prominent contributors to this debate. In his 1989 book, The 
Age of Unreason, Handy looked forward to a new type of organization: the shamrock 
organization. 
The professional core 
« In-demand skills 
« |dentity and purpose from their 
work 
» Work long and hard but expect 
R 
rewards 
Contractual fringe 
. 
Flexible labor force 
« External specialists 
« Mot looking for long-term career 
or promotion with the company 
» Interim or part-time work often 
a choice 
« Individuals and 
organizations 
« Paid for results, not time 
« Can only exercise control 
by specifying results 
The shamrock organization describes a type of organizational structure with three 
parts, or leaves: ‘A form of organization based around a core of essential executives 
and workers supported by outside contractors and part-time help.’ 
The shamrock model is often used to explain the move to outsourcing non-core 
functions. The top leaf 
of the shamrock represents the core staff 
of the organization. 
These people are likely to be senior management and highly trained professionals. 
The second leaf represents the contractual fringe, made up of individuals or other 
organizations, and it may include people who once worked for the organization but 
now provide it with services. These individuals operate within the broad framework 
set down by the core but have a high level of discretionary decision-making power to 
complete projects. 
In Handy's model, the third leaf includes the flexible labor force. These workers must be 
sufficiently close to the organization to feel a sense of commitment, which ensures that 
their work is carried out to a high standard, despite being part time or intermittent.

Project-based organization 
A project-based organizational structure revolves around specialized teams working 
on specific projects. The company takes staff from each department, appoints them, 
and assigns them to the project team. They then work to complete the assigned task. 
Unlike matrix structures, they are project focused and do not report to more than one 
boss. A project-based organizational structure is important to ensure the business 
remains competitive and can manage operations effectively. 
«f Figure2.8 Thisdiagram 
shows what a project-based 
organizational structure would 
look like 
Director 
, 
[Manager: Project) 
Analysts 
Architect 
Developer 
Tester 
Advantages 
+ Allows for innovation: Businesses can develop new innovations by launching new 
projects, allowing them to remain competitive and adapt quickly to changing markets. 
* Greater team control: Project managers have more control over the team. Unlike 
a matrix structure, teams focus on the project and do not report to more than one 
boss. So the project manager can supervise them fully. 
* Synergy between employees: This structure facilitates individuals across 
departments to work together as a team. They work together to make the project a 
success, creating a strong team culture. 
+ 
Efficient use of resources and competencies: This structure maximizes the 
knowledge and skills of existing employees. As companies launch projects only 
when they are essential, this structure allows them to allocate physical and human 
resources to the most beneficial efforts. 
Disadvantages 
+ Blurred organizational lines: This structure effectively draws staff from their 
functional work. When appointed to a team, they leave their old job and focus on 
the project. 
» High cost: Allocating resources and staff to work on a single project can incur 
high implicit costs and may prevent the business from meeting broader objectives. 
As a result, project organization usually applies to large, short-term projects. 
* Delayed effectiveness: Project teams involve staff with various backgrounds 
and functional skills. This could lead to communication barriers and a delay in 
knowledge transfer. 
67

Human resource management 
Case study - Marriott International 
Marriott International has updated its organizational structure and made several 
new executive appointments. 
‘The size and scale of our company is significant, and we expect it to be even more 
so given the exciting opportunities ahead of us,” Anthony Capuano, newly named 
president and CEO of Marriott International, said in a statement. 
Drew Pinto, a nearly 20-year company veteran, has been appointed Executive Vice 
President and chief revenue and technology officer, reporting to Capuano. Pinto 
will lead sales, revenue management, distribution channels, digital and information 
technology for Marriott. ‘These global platforms are critical to Marriott’s continued 
growth and profitability and Drew is the ideal leader to innovate and scale these 
capabilities, Capuano said. 
Long-time Marriott executive Peggy Fang Roe has been appointed Executive 
Vice President and chief customer officer, also reporting to Capuano. Roe will 
be responsible for developing and executing key aspects of the company’s global 
consumer strategy, including evolving the portfolio of brands, the Marriott Bonvoy 
loyalty program, and developing the end-to-end customer experience using data 
and Al to fuel future growth. 
Tina Edmundson has been appointed president of luxury, reporting directly to 
Capuano, overseeing a portfolio of nearly 500 properties across The Ritz-Carlton, 
Ritz-Carlton Reserve, Bulgari Hotels & Resorts, St. Regis Hotels & Resorts, 
Edition, The Luxury Collection, JW Marriott and W Hotels Worldwide brands. ‘As 
we emerge from the pandemic, it is clear guests want aspirational experiences,’ 
Capuano said. 
Mao Yibing, a 24-year Marriott veteran, has returned to the company as president of 
the Greater China region. A native ofBeijing who now calls Hong Kong home, Mao 
first joined Marriott in 1996. She held positions of increasing responsibility during 
her tenure with the company until she was SVP and chief legal counsel, Asia Pacific, 
before stepping down in 2020. ‘I am delighted that Yibing is returning to Marriott in 
the role of president of Greater China, one of our fastest growing regions,’ Capuano 
said. ‘During her time with the company, she led Marriott’s efforts to develop a 
strong profile in Asia, and forge substantive and collaborative relationships with 
owners and key internal and external stakeholders. Yibing is exactly who we need to 
lead the next chapter of growth for Marriott in Greater China.’ 
Under the company’s new structure, Marriott's continent presidents will all report 
directly to Capuano: Satya Anand, president, Europe, Middle East & Africa; Brian 
King, president, Caribbean and Latin America; Raj Menon, president, Asia Pacific 
Excluding China; and Mao Yibing, president, Greater China. Liam Brown, group 
president, U.S. and Canada, will continue to report to Capuano. 
1 Based on the information above, construct a simple organizational chart for 
Marriott International. 
68

