2 Comment on the structure of the organizational chart using the key terms in 
Table 2.1. 
3 Analyze one advantage and one disadvantage to Anthony Capuano of the 
organizational chart he has created at the top levels of Marriott International. 
2.3 Leadership and management 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
+ 
outline the key functions of management 
+ 
distinguish between management versus leadership 
» 
discuss the following leadership styles: 
8] 
Q 
8] 
o] 
3l 
autocratic 
paternalistic 
democratic 
laissez-faire 
situational 
. 
distinguish between scientific and intuitive management. 
Why is a democratic style of leadership one way of encouraging creativity in a business? 
The key functions of management 
Management is a process that all managers, irrespective of their aptitudes or skills, 
engage in through inter-related functions to achieve their desired goals. There are four 
key functions of management. 
3 
Planning and 
decision-making 
Determining courses 
of action 
Q 
Organizing 
Functions 
of 
Coordination 
of activities 
and resources 
S 
Controlling 
Monitoring and 
evaluating activities 
management 
Leading 
Managing and 
motivating people 
« Figure2.9 The four 
functions of management 
69

Figure 2.10 The manager 
and leader roles are different 
70 
| 4 
Planning and decision-making 
Planning is a vital role within a manager’s remit. Looking to the future and predicting 
possible trends or occurrences that are likely to influence the working situation is essential. 
Planning involves setting an organization’s goals and deciding how best to achieve them. 
Organizing 
Organizing can be defined as the process that enables plans to happen. Once a 
manager has a plan and goals within that, they can begin organizing the resources 
necessary to reach the goals. 
Leading 
Leading involves influencing or prompting stakeholders to work together in the 
interest of the organization. It involves creating a positive attitude toward the work and 
goals among employees, managers, and other key stakeholders. 
Controlling 
Controlling is the monitoring of the progress toward achieving the goals and the plan. 
It is an essential part of management. 
Controlling involves measuring and adapting the tasks and actions that will lead to the 
successful completion of goals or objectives. Controlling enables the accomplishment 
of the plan. 
These functions are cyclical, with evaluations informing further plans, organization, 
and leadership. 
Management versus leadership 
Leadership and management are often mistaken for the same thing. However, they are 
very different. Leaders have people who follow them, while managers have people who 
simply work for them. 
Leadership is about motivating people to understand and believe in a company’s vision 
and to work on achieving the company’s goals. 
Manager 
\Y/ 
Leader 
e 
1l 
s | = questioning 
] 
| . creates central figures ! 
|-'AS|£id 
I 
« motivates 
| - catalyst for change 
| 
| «inspires 
l 
| « has followers 
l 

Management is more an administrative role within the workplace, ensuring the day- 
to-day activities are being completed. 
In a small business, the owner needs to be both a strong leader and manager to get 
their team on board working toward their vision of success. 
Leadership and management often go hand in hand. Even though they are not the 
same thing, they are closely linked and complement each another. 
For any company to be successful, it needs management that can plan, organize, 
and coordinate its employees, and leaders who are inspiring and motivating them to 
perform to the best of their ability. 
Figure 2.10 on the previous page summarizes how managers and leaders may work. 
Leadership styles 
Is being knowledgeable 
The type of leadership style an individual follows can depend on their personality, 
i Esse”t?ial qualityina 
managers 
traits, and attributes. There are advantages and disadvantages to each leadership style. 
Five key leadership styles are outlined below. 
Autocratic 
An autocratic leader, also known as an authoritarian leader, possesses a management 
style in which little or no input from employees is requested in the decision-making 
process. This is a top-down leadership approach in which senior management or a 
central leader has the final say on all business-related decisions. 
Advantages 
Although often considered an unpopular method of leadership, autocracy does have 
some advantages. 
* 
Insituations where decisive leadership is needed to make difficult or complex 
decisions, this approach can be well suited. For example, in military conflicts or an 
air traffic control tower. 

IB learner profile 
Caring 
In small groups, share ideas 
on the types of organizations 
that may suit a paternalistic 
leadership style, whereby a 
caring approach would fit with 
the ethos of the business. 
72 
* 
Crises often call for split-second decision-making. If an urgent need is faced by an 
organization, then an authoritarian leader can quickly make decisions without 
consulting a group of people. 
* The authoritarian leader sets clear expectations and rules for employees to follow. 
A clear chain of command can help to ensure communication from the top to the 
bottom of the organization is not distorted. 
Disadvantages 
There are several disadvantages to consider regarding the autocratic style of leadership. 
* 
It can create rigid work environments that feel unwelcoming. 
* 
Autocratic environments can stifle creativity and limit the potential of employees 
by restricting their ability to think outside of the box. 
» Working for an autocratic leader can be demotivating. Employees may be less likely 
to enjoy their job if they feel that their opinions are not important, leading to low 
levels of morale. 
Paternalistic 
Paternalistic leadership is a leadership style that involves a dominant authority figure 
who acts like a parent or caregiver and treats employees as if they were members 
of a large, extended family. In exchange, the leader expects loyalty and trust from 
employees. 
Advantages 
*» A paternalistic leader thinks about the big picture and considers how every 
decision will affect their employees. 
* Value is placed upon education and social skills, with leaders looking to provide 
employees with opportunities to improve business and interpersonal skills. 
» Employees may work harder to complete tasks within a given time frame so that they 
can reach, and sometimes even exceed, their goals in order to please their leader. 
Disadvantages 
» Employees can suffer from low motivation if a loyal connection to management is 
not established. 
* Anincreased dependency of employees on the leader can mean more supervision 
is required. 
» Employees may be dissatisfied if bad decisions are made. 
* 
Like parents or caregivers, managers sometimes must discipline employees. 
Democratic 
Democratic leadership, also known as participative or shared leadership, brings leaders 
and employees into every decision-making process. Although the final word belongs 
to the leaders, there is equal participation from employees in discussions and debate to 
find solutions to problems. 
Advantages 
* 
Increased staff productivity and job satisfaction can result from encouraging 
employee engagement. Employees are more likely to be happier and work hard 
when they know that their opinions matter.

The freedom to consult anyone in the business allows for diversity of ideas. Often 
insights from frontline staff allow senior management an opportunity to make 
better decisions. 
A democratic approach can help to build a strong team as it fosters collaboration, 
encourages trust, and creates mutual respect. Democratic leaders tend to avoid 
bias, and choices are based on the information presented. 
Innovation and creativity are encouraged when individuals collaborate effectively 
as a team and develop fresh new ideas. 
Disadvantages 
Decision-making can be slower as democratic leadership requires many people’s 
inputs in the decision-making process. 
In times of crisis, leaders might not feel confident enough to make instant decisions 
without the time to consult anyone. It is difficult for them to decide without their 
team members or employees. 
Under a democratic leader, the emphasis is on considering everyone’s viewpoints, 
regardless of whether they are the right people to make decisions. Although the 
leader can make the final decision, employees may not have sufficient experience to 
make the right decisions. 
Employees have different views and ideas on a specific problem or situation, but 
leaders can choose only one. The employees whose ideas they disregard may feel 
they are not valued in decision-making. 
Laissez-faire 
Loosely translated from French, laissez-faire means ‘let it be’. In practice, it means 
leaders provide their subordinates with the freedom to complete responsibilities in a 
manner they choose, without requiring strict policies or procedures. 
Advantages 
This leadership style empowers employees and allows them the opportunity to 
practice their leadership skills, encouraging personal growth. 
The level of freedom afforded to employees can lead to increased innovation and 
creativity as there is less fear of failure. 
It encourages trust between employees and the leader and instills a sense of 
independence. 
Decision-making can become faster, due to the absence of micromanagement, as 
employees are encouraged to make their own choices without a long wait time for 
approval. 
Disadvantages 
In the wrong business context, too much freedom given to employees can result in 
low productivity if they know there is little oversight of their activities. 
Conflicts can arise between team members if there are no clear directions to follow. 
Conflicts can be made worse by potential confusion about roles and responsibilities. 
Situational 
Situational leadership is an adaptive leadership style in which a leader changes their 
approach based on the individual, the task, and the context. From a leadership perspective, 
73

Human resource management 
this theory changes the conversation from ‘Who am I and how do Ilead?’ to ‘Who is the 
person in front of me, and what do they need from me in order to be successful?’ 
Ken Blanchard and Paul Hersey developed their situational leadership theory in their 
book Management of Organizational Behavior. In it, they call on the situational leader to 
draw on a framework that depends upon flexibility, adaptability, and a considered 
analysis of what employees need to develop and succeed in a given business context. 
This helps to inform the appropriate leadership style needed for each situation. 
1 The enthusiastic beginner 
This is where almost everyone starts when they are learning a new role or skill. Their 
commitment is high because there has not been any experience that would challenge 
it, and their competence is low because they have little-to-no experience. 
Figure 2.11 
Blanchard and P 
4 
Hersey's situational leadership 
framework 
B 
= 
g 
@ 
3 
s 
g 
o 
E] 
v 
Directive leadership 
People don't know what they don't know. When an employee or teammate is learning 
something new, the best leadership for them will be highly directive. They do not 
need to be encouraged to do it, as much as they need to be told what to do. This is not 
demeaning; it’s just the reality of starting to learn something new. 
2 The disillusioned learner 
When employees are at the disillusioned learner stage, they have probably come up 
against their shortcomings in the competency they are trying to gain. This experience 
of failure or inadequacy, coupled with only marginally increased competence, can be 
incredibly deflating. 
As a person is confronted with the shortcomings in their proficiency, the natural 
reaction is to become discouraged. If a leader perceives that shift in someone who 
reports directly to them, it is essential that they add highly supportive behavior while 
maintaining a highly directive leadership. The critical mistake leaders make at this stage 
is to think that because the person has been working at a skill that they no longer need 
direction. However, this is the stage where highly directive behavior is most important. 
74

3 The capable-but-cautious performer 
At this stage, the employee starts to turn a corner. As their competence increases, often 
people will start to move out of that low-commitment slump. 
This is a critical transition, according to situational leadership theory. As someone’s 
competence makes meaningful progress, and their commitment level increases again, 
it's important to scale back the level of direction provided while maintaining a highly 
supportive environment. 
4 The self-reliant achiever 
At this point, the developing employee has reached a point of mastery in the skill they 
are learning. They can perform at a high level and feel confident about the quality of 
their contributions. 
If a self-reliant achiever knows what they are doing, then giving them lots of direction, 
or smothering them with check-ins, will most likely backfire. It's a waste of a 
manager’s time and takes the employee’s focus away from the thing they have become 
good at. Managers of self-reliant achievers should focus on delegating tasks more than 
supporting their work. 
Scientific and intuitive thinking/management 
Decision-making is an essential part of running a business, whether this is deciding 
to launch a new product, to relocate the business, who to employ, or how to respond 
to a new competitor in the market. We can view thinking, managing, and ultimately 
decision-making, as either intuitive or scientific. Intuition is based on a gut feeling and 
experience, whereas a scientific approach is based on data and analysis. 
Intuitive thinking and decision-making relies on instinctive understanding and feeling, 
often used to make quick decisions. Intuitive thinkers usually don’t need a lot of 
information or conscious reasoning to make a decision, as they just know. This can 
make intuitive thinking very helpful in fast-paced, stressful situations. 
Advantages of intuitive thinking 
+ 
It's fast. Managers don't have to make calculations or compare alternatives. 
Intuitive thinking often comes from experience, so there’s nothing to think about. 
*  When a decision is made based on intuition, it feels right and natural. 
» 
It allows for creativity. 
* 
It can facilitate strategic thinking and strategic decision-making. 
Disadvantages of intuitive thinking 
* 
Intuitive thinkers are more prone to making poor decisions and mistakes when 
they let their intuition guide them instead of considering all options and thinking 
things through logically. This is particularly true in unfamiliar or rapidly changing 
environments, for example, stock market trading. 
+ 
Confirmation bias can occur when managers form an opinion or conclusions early 
on and then look only for information that confirms those conclusions. 
*+ 
Errors in fact-based situations arise as intuition isn't always reliable in decision- 
making. 
79

76 
Human resource management 
Scientific thinking aids businesses and managers who want to reduce uncertainty 
and risk by applying logic to decision-making, supported by relevant data. This may 
involve the use of: 
* 
data mining and big data to source relevant data to inform decisions 
* 
software logic and predictive models to analyze scenarios 
* 
forecasts to consider the possible implications of business decisions. 
Advantages of scientific thinking 
* 
Decisions are data-driven and evidence-based. 
* Some but not all subjective judgment is removed from the decision. 
Disadvantages of scientific thinking 
* 
Decisions may still rely on assumptions. 
* 
Scientific thinking doesn't guarantee the best decision will be taken. 
* This way of thinking may ignore the business experience that gives some context. 
Read the article ‘The intuitive manager: A threatened species?’, 
which is available from the QR code. 
To what extent do you agree that intuitive decision-making 
should be encouraged when making important decisions in the 
business environment? 
Support your answer with real world examples where possible. 
Case study - Musk and Ma leadership styles 
Micromanagers are supposedly the opposite of delegators. Micromanagers are 
attacked for obsessing over fine detail, stifling their subordinates’ initiative and lacking 
strategic nous. Delegators are applauded for appointing gifted deputies, ‘empowering’ 
front-line team members and stepping back to concentrate on the wider vision. 
While it may no longer be his biggest problem, Elon Musk has been criticized for 
micromanaging Tesla, after the electric carmaker he heads struggled to stick to 
forecasts and burnt through cash and senior executives. Some investors have urged 
him to appoint a chief operating officer, rather than trying to solve Tesla’s problems 
single-handed by working 120-hour weeks. One former executive told Business 
Insider, the US news website, that when something goes wrong, ‘Elon fires some 
engineer that made some irrelevant, bad decision and Elon sleeps on the factory 
floor until the problem is fixed, or whatever. But it doesn’t actually fix the root 
problem, which is terrible management.’ 
Coincidentally, around the same time as Musk was earning opprobrium for his 
micromanaging, another entrepreneur, Jack Ma, was winning plaudits for being 
a great delegator. Ma announced last month he would step down as chairman 
of Alibaba, the Chinese internet group, next year, handing the role to the chief 
executive Daniel Zhang. Ma was already known for devolving a lot of autonomy 
to Alibaba’s business units and for appointing ‘a lot of generals’, in the words of 
Duncan Clark, a consultant and author of Alibaba: The House That Jack Ma Built.

There are good reasons why Ma is more hands-off at Alibaba and Musk more hands- 
on at Tesla and SpaceX, his rocket venture. Ma lacks Musk'’s technical knowledge. It 
would be hard for him to step in and fix a coding problem. Musk possesses both the 
total commitment of the start-up founder and the skills to repair things that go wrong. 
In his 2015 biography of Musk, Ashlee Vance identified how in some situations the 
same combination that is now under fire at Tesla was an asset to SpaceX. A SpaceX 
colleague pointed out how Musk would sometimes take on a flagging project 
himself on top of his CEO duties, dismissing the project leader. ‘What's crazy is that 
Elon actually does it, this colleague said. ‘Every time he’s fired someone and taken 
their job, he’s delivered on whatever the project was.’ 
The competence of your manager is one important factor in deciding how you 
view his or her intervention in your project, according to Roshni Raveendhran, a 
professor at the University of Virginia’s Darden School of Business. 
After studying what she describes as ‘detail-oriented controlling behaviours’, 
she suggests micromanagement is not a leadership style, but a phenomenon that 
depends in part on the context in which it occurs. While micromanaging generally 
reflected badly on the leader, she and her fellow researchers found people were less 
likely to take a negative view of leaders who knew what they were doing. Similarly, 
a subordinate who was new to the job, or less competent, was more likely to accept, 
or even welcome, the leader’s hands-on guidance. 
That micromanaging and delegating are on the same spectrum is not so surprising. 
Even Ma, the arch-delegator, is capable of getting close to the problem when required, 
particularly if he feels that Alibaba is neglecting customers. ‘He’s like a hawk,’ says 
Duncan Clark. ‘He swoops down on things that might violate trust.’ Similarly, it is hard 
to say that Musk, whose goals include the colonisation of Mars, lacks a long-range vision. 
The question is one of degree. When she gave her MBA student volunteers the role 
of detail-oriented leader in her experiments, Prof Raveendhran found they often 
assumed that micromanaging was what leaders were supposed to do; but when 
they played the put-upon subordinate they hated taking close instruction. 
Neither extreme is ideal. T'm hating work at the moment: the boss is always on top 
of us,” we might say about a micromanager. But then when a problem spirals out 
of control, critics wonder why a strategic leader was not ‘on top of the problem’. 
Achieving that balance between seeing the big picture and worrying about the 
detail is hard, but it is the essence of good leadership. 
1 Compare the leadership styles of Musk and Ma. Discuss their suitability for their 
specific roles. 
Practice questions 
1 
Distinguish between leadership and management. 
(6 marks) 
2 Explain one advantage and one disadvantage from an employee’s 
perspective of working for a laissez faire leader. 
(4 marks) 
3 To what extent would a paternalistic leader be most suitable in 
running the accident and emergency department in a hospital? 
(10 marks) 
a7

