78 
Human resource management 
2.4 Motivation and demotivation 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
define motivation in a business context 
* describe the following motivation theories associated with: 
o Frederick Wimslow Taylor 
o Abraham Maslow 
o Frederick Herzberg 
o 
David McClelland 
o 
Edward Deci and Richard Ryan 
5 
John Stacey Adams 
5 
Victor Vroom 
. 
calculate labor turnover 
. 
explore the reasons for labor turnover in a business 
. 
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a high labor turnover for a 
business 
. 
explain and apply the following methods of appraisal: formative, 
summative, 360-degree feedback, self-appraisal 
. 
explain the different methods of recruitment 
. 
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of internal and external recruitment 
» 
explain and apply different types of financial and non-financial rewards 
» 
explain and apply the different types of training: on-the-job, off-the-job, 
induction training. 
What is the impact of financial motivation on employees’ sustainable behavior? 
Motivation refers to the ways a business can encourage its employees to work. A 
motivated workforce will care about the success of the business and help it to achieve 
its goals and realize the mission statement. 
People can be motivated intrinsically or extrinsically. Intrinsic motivation involves 
completing a task that is personally rewarding with an absence of threats or rewards. 
Extrinsic motivation involves doing something because there is an external factor 
driving the activity, such as a reward like pay or the threat of negative outcomes. 
Motivational theories 
Individuals are motivated by different things and deciding on the best way to motivate 
people in a business has led to the development of a range of motivational theories. 
This section provides an overview of some of the key theorists and the methods and 
frameworks they propose.

Frederick Wimslow Taylor — scientific management theory 
Taylor is best known for his 1911 book Principles of Scientific Management. He suggested 
that an organization and its employees should work together to get the maximum 
benefit from each other and be compensated for this endeavor. Taylor’s philosophy 
focused on the belief that making people work as hard as they could was not as 
efficient as optimizing the way the work was done. 
Taylor’s overriding principles of scientific management are as follows: 
* Each part of an individual’s work is analyzed ‘scientifically’, and the most efficient 
method for undertaking the job is devised. This becomes the ‘one best way’ of 
working. This consists of examining the tools needed to carry out the work and 
measuring the maximum amount a ‘first-class’ worker could do in a day. All 
workers are then expected to do this much work every day. 
* 
Scientifically, the most suitable person to undertake the job is chosen. The 
individual is taught to do the job in the exact way devised. Taylor’s belief was that 
every worker had the ability to be ‘first-class” at some job. It was the responsibility 
of management to find out which job suited each employee and train them until 
they were first-class. 
* Managers must cooperate with workers to ensure the job is done in the scientific 
way. 
* Thereis a clear ‘division’ of work and responsibility between management and 
workers. Managers concern themselves with the planning and supervision of the 
work, while the workers carry it out. 
Abraham Maslow - hierarchy of needs 
Maslow’s motivation theory on the hierarchy of needs is perhaps one of the most well- 
known and influential theories on workplace motivation. 
Developed in the 1940s, psychologist Abraham Maslow’s theory suggested that 
humans have a hierarchy of needs. That is, that all humans act in a way that will firstly 
address basic needs, before moving on to satisfy other, so-called, higher-level needs. He 
arranged these in a form of a pyramid, shown in Figure 2.12. 
There are five main levels to Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, with the most basic needs 
forming the first level. Originally, Maslow believed that a person needed to completely 
satisfy one level to begin pursuing further levels. However, a more modern perspective 
sees overlap between the levels. As an individual reaches higher levels, their motivation 
is directed more toward these levels. Although their main focus is on those higher 
levels, they will continue to pursue elements within the lower levels of the hierarchy 
but with less intensity. 
From a management perspective, it is worth noting some of Maslow’s main 
assertions: 
« Asthe needs in one level are met, the next level of needs becomes more of a 
motivator to an individual. 
79

80 
* Only unsatisfied needs motivate an individual, not satisfied ones. 
* Onreaching self-actualization, this stimulates a desire for more of what Maslow 
termed as ‘peak experiences’, created by the effect of reaching one’s full potential. 
Figure2.12 Maslow's P 
hierarchy of needs 
spontaneity, 
problem solving, 
lack of prejudice, 
Self-actualization 
acceptance of facts 
Esteem 
friendship, family, sexual intimacy 
Love/belonging 
Safety 
Physiological 
Frederick Herzberg — two-factor theory 
The two-factor theory of work motivation developed by Frederick Herzberg proposes 
that employee job satisfaction and job dissatisfaction are influenced by separate 
‘factors’. These factors are divided into motivators and hygiene factors. 
e 
i 
, Herfbergs > 
Herzberg’s Two-factor Theory 
two-factor theory 
» 
Motivators cause employees to work harder and are found within the job itself. 
* Hygiene factors are not present within the job itself but surround the job. An 
absence of these factors will cause employees to work less hard. 
Herzberg's motivators and hygiene factors can be seen in Figure 2.14.

«f Figure2.14 Herzberg's 
factors 
Two-factor Theory of Motivation 
David McClelland — acquired needs theory 
The acquired needs theory was proposed by psychologist David McClelland, one of 
the most cited psychologists in the 20th century. Unlike Herzberg’s two-factor theory, 
McClelland separated needs into three classifications and argued that these needs were 
specific to every individual and were acquired over time. 
The three classifications can be seen in Figure 2.15. 
] Figure 2.15 
McClelland's 
| 
three classifications of nesds 
The need 
The need for 
The need for 
for power 
affiliation 
achievement 
Wants to control 
Wants to belong to 
Sets and accomplishes 
and influence others 
the group 
challenging goals 
Likes to win 
Wants to be liked 
Takes calculated risks 
arguments 
and will go along 
Likes to receive 
Enjoys competition 
with whatever 
the rest of the group 
wants to do 
Prefers collaboration 
over competition 
Does not like high 
risk or uncertainty 
and winning 
Enjoys status 
and recognition 
1 The need for power 
regular feedback on 
their progress and 
achievements 
Likes to work alone 
When an individual wants the ability to direct others, it suggests they have a high need 
for power. Institutional power needs also indicate a desire for organization, which 
makes the person more effective as a supervisor because the goals are directed toward 
the needs of the company instead of their personal needs. 
81

82 
Human resource management 
2 The need for affiliation 
When an individual has a high need for affiliation, they have a strong desire to be 
accepted by others and look for harmony in their lives. Typically, they will look to 
take the path of least resistance in their decisions. By wanting to conform to the social 
norms of the groups, they desire significant levels of social interaction. 
3 The need for achievement 
Individuals that possess a high need for achievement will avoid situations that are high 
risk or low risk in nature. Low-risk situations lack opportunities to move forward, 
while high-risk situations are often seen as an outcome of chance instead of skill. 
Individuals with this need take calculated risks and will make choices when there isa 
greater than 50 per cent chance of success. 
People who have different needs require different forms of motivation. 
Activity 
Using McClelland’s acquired needs theory, suggest ways in which a business may 
look to motivate employees who exhibit needs from each of the classifications. 
Edward Deci and Richard Ryan - self-determination theory 
The self-determination theory developed by Deci and Ryan helped to counter the once 
dominant belief that the best way to get humans to perform tasks was to reinforce 
their behavior with rewards. First introduced in their 1985 book Self-Determination 
and Intrinsic Motivation in Human Behavior, their theory suggested that people tend to be 
driven by a need to grow and gain fulfillment. 
This theory suggests that people can become self-determined when their needs for 
competence, connection, and autonomy are fulfilled. 
» Competence: People need to gain mastery of tasks and learn different skills. When 
people are confident that they have the skills needed for success, they are more 
likely to take actions that will help them to achieve their goals. 
* Connection or relatedness: People need to experience a sense of belonging and 
attachment to other people. 
* Autonomy: People need to feel in control of their own behaviors and goals. The 
ability to take direct action that will result in real change plays a major part in 
helping people feel self-determined. 
Let’s consider an employee who fails at a particular task in the work environment. 
Under this theory, if this person is high in self-determination, they will admit their 
mistake, believe that they can do something to fix the problem, and take action to 
correct the mistake. 
If the person is low in self-determination, they might look for other things that they 
can blame. They might make excuses, assign blame, or refuse to admit their own role 
in the failure. Most importantly, this person won't feel motivated to fix the mistake. 
[nstead, they might feel helpless to control the situation and believe that nothing that 
they do will have any real effect.

In addition, people who demonstrate self-determined behaviors tend not to rely on 
external rewards as encouragement to do a task. Often, completing the task properly 
is its own reward. To motivate these individuals, it may be best to remove external 
rewards and punishments. 
Taking responsibility is important for learning how to become self-determined as 
it helps the individual accept that they are human (meaning that they are capable of 
failure) and that they can admit their mistakes (a sign of confidence). 
John Stacey Adams — equity theory 
John Stacey Adams, a workplace and behavioral psychologist, developed his job 
motivation theory in 1963. Adams’ equity theory advocates for a fair balance between 
an employee’s ‘inputs’ (such as hard work, skill level, acceptance, and enthusiasm) and 
their ‘outputs’ (salary, benefits, intangibles such as recognition, and more). 
This fair balance achieves a strong and productive relationship between the business 
and the employee, resulting in contented, motivated employees. 
If an employee feels that their inputs are greater than the outputs they receive, they 
are likely to become de-motivated, both in relation to their job and their employer. 
Employees respond to this in different ways, and may exhibit demotivation, reduced 
effort, annoyance, and possibly disruptive behavior in the workplace. 
While it is difficult to quantify many inputs and outputs, the theory argues that 
managers should aim for a fair balance between the inputs that an employee gives, and 
the outputs they receive. 
Table 2.2 Employee inputs and outputs 
Inputs 
Outputs 
Effort 
Financial rewards (such as salary, 
Loyalty 
benefits, perks) 
Hard work 
Recognition 
Commitment 
Reputation 
Skill 
Responsibility 
Ability 
Sense of achievement 
Adaptability 
Praise 
Flexibility 
Stimulus 
Acceptance of others 
Sense of advancement/growth 
Determination 
J ob securlty 
Enthusiasm 
Trust in superiors 
Support of colleagues 
Personal sacrifice 
83

84 
Human resource management 
According to the theory, employees are likely to be content where they perceive inputs 
and outputs to be in balance. 
Victor Vroom - expectancy theory 
Vroom'’s expectancy theory (also known as the VIE theory of motivation) proposes 
that individuals rationally weigh the relative attractiveness of all possible rewards 
and outcomes of an action. In addition, individuals also estimate the probability 
that performance and effort will lead to that desirable outcome. Vroom called them 
valence, instrumentality, and expectancy. 
Valence 
Valence refers to the strength of a person’s performance for a given outcome. Vroom 
argued that psychological and physical objects (like satisfaction, money, etc.) have 
attracting or repelling forces. For instance, money may be an attracting force for most 
people, whereas frustration due to an abusive boss may be a repelling force. 
Instrumentality 
Instrumentality refers to the relationship between performance and the attainment 
of the promised reward. An employee may think that they will receive an increase 
in compensation if they fulfill the target. Fulfilling a target will also involve working 
longer hours, more work responsibility, and less time for family and leisure. Hence, 
several instrumentalities are involved in a single decision. The individual now behaves 
like a scientist and combines the information to decide whether the outcome will be 
positive or negative. 
Expectancy 
Expectancy refers to a person’s belief that increased effort will lead to the desired 
outcome. For instance, people might believe that they will not be promoted, despite 
working hard and achieving targets, because their boss does not like them. In such a 
case, expectancy is low. If they believe that working longer hours will enable them to 
achieve their goal, expectancy will be high. 
These three components make up the VIE theory. In simple terms, individuals ask 
themselves three questions: 
1 
 To what extent do I desire or value the outcomes? 
2 
Is the expected outcome likely to yield other negative or positive outcomes? 
3 
Istheaction am engaging in likely to lead to a desired outcome? 
The VIE theory assumes individuals to be calculative scientists, who are constantly 
assessing the benefits associated with a particular task. 
Activity 
Examine two ways in which managers could motivate employees in accordance 
with expectancy theory. 

Alongside the theories mentioned in this unit, there are others that are often 
mentioned when talking about motivation in a business context. They include: 
+ 
Douglas McGregor: Theory X and Theory Y 
 William Ouchi: Theory Z 
+ 
Elton Mayo: The Hawthorne Effect 
* 
Daniel Pink: Three Elements of Intrinsic Motivation 
Find out about these theories and identify any similarities with the ones you have 
already studied. 
Labor turnover 
There are multiple reasons why employees may leave a business, whether this is for 
career advancement elsewhere, unhappiness in their current role, or moving abroad 
to start a new life. Whatever the reasons, a business needs to keep track of its labor 
turnover. 
Labor turnover refers to the rate at which employees leave employment. Labor turnover 
can be evaluated by relating the number of employees leaving their employment during 
a certain period to the total or average numbers employed in that period. 
It can be calculated using the following formula: 
Number of employees leaving in a year 
Average number of people employed 
Case study - Hospitality sector hits crisis point 
A 2022 article on the website stuff.co.nz discussed a report into the hospitality 
sector, which found that the sector is at a crisis point with high turnover, bullying, 
and lack of training. 
85

86 
Human resource management 
Research report “Voices From the Front Line’ said the sector was dealing with 
employment and work issues, including problematic pay and working conditions, bullying 
and harassment, and significant levels of non-compliance with employment law. 
Academics at AUT University gathered responses to 40 questions from 396 people 
in late 2019 and early 2020. 
‘While the survey was conducted during the exceptional times of COVID-19, the 
findings align with historical work experience problems in this sector, the report says. 
‘The findings highlight unfair and illegal practices but also aim to be the starting 
point for discussion to improve work experiences and long-term sustainability for 
the hospitality sector.’ 
It found that 16 per cent of respondents had not signed a contract before starting 
their jobs, 18 per cent did not receive the minimum wage, and 77 per cent did not 
receive other entitlements such as time off in lieu, holiday pay, and rest breaks. 
Many respondents said they were reluctant to raise issues with their management or 
HR department because of a fear of negative consequences. 
Nearly half (48.3 per cent) of respondents said they never had the opportunity to get 
a pay rise or promotion. ‘No pay rise in the five years [ worked for him. If you were 
not happy with the pay you got you could leave, and he would find someone that 
was happy with the pay,” one respondent said. 
Verbal abuse from management, co-workers, or customers was experienced by 58 
per cent. 
Nearly half reported they had witnessed or experienced bullying in the workplace. 
Bullying was often not reported to management, mainly out of fear of being fired, 
or making the situation worse. 
‘The results support previous research in New Zealand and internationally that 
depict the hospitality sector as having significant levels of labor turnover, low pay, 
and poor work conditions,’ the report says. 
The report suggests three priorities for change: 
1 Drive out employers who fail to provide a minimum of decent work 
experiences. Employer representatives have a role to play in naming and 
shaming poor employers. 
2 Offer better pay conditions, training, and development associated with longer- 
term career paths and the ability for employee voices to be effective and make 
significant changes in the workplace. 
3 Change the image of hospitality work from ‘poor and off-putting’ in order to 
overcome embedded recruitment and retention issues resulting from this image. 
The report encourages employer groups, unions, and the government to provide 
support and firm direction to employers. 
1 Define the term ‘labor turnover’. 
2 Analyze the reasons for high labor turnover in the hospitality sector. 
3 To what extent do you think the three suggested priorities for change will 
lower the labor turnover rate in the hospitality sector?

Potential causes of labor turnover 
Poor recruitment can lead to employees who are mismatched with the business or 
unsuitable for the job roles. This can result in a desire by the employee to leave the 
business, or the business to look to cease employment contracts. 
On reaching retirement age, employees can leave the business; some may be offered 
the opportunity to continue past retirement age or even volunteer to do so. 
Redundancy arises after the need for a particular job role ceases, and employees are 
let go from the business. This could be a large contributor to labor turnover in industry 
sectors during times of recession. 
Pay and conditions are important factors that can influence an employee’s decision 
on whether to remain with their current employer. If they don’t match an employee’s 
expectations, this can be a key contributing factor to the decision to leave. 
Lack of career progression opportunities can cause employees to look to other 
employers who would provide better opportunities to reach their work and career 
goals. 
Advantages of labor turnover 
There are some advantages to labor turnover: 
* 
Healthy turnover enables growth. 
* New employees bring fresh insights and innovative ideas. 
* 
It can remove underperforming employees. 
* New staff may introduce new concepts, skills, tools, and experiences. 
* 
Itenables teams to develop and evolve. 
* 
It can encourage the promotion of those staff that are good at their roles rather 
than offering promotion because of length of service. 
Disadvantages of labor turnover 
There are also disadvantages to labor turnover: 
+ 
It takes money, time, and resources to recruit new employees. 
* A high labor turnover could damage a business’ reputation — there may not be staff 
who advocate for the business, and those leaving may share negative experiences. 
+ 
Changes to teams can cause project delays, with new employees needing training 
on company policies, tools, and systems. 
* Employees may believe that they are expendable if there are too many leavers, and 
they may seek a company with more stability. If a popular employee leaves, it can 
encourage others to follow. 
* Being short-staffed can lead to pressure on the remaining staff. 
*+ 
It can become harder to meet commitments if a team’s size changes too rapidly or 
dramatically. 
Appraisal 
An appraisal is a review of an employee’s performance, by a senior member of staff, to 
verify the employee’s contribution to the business against the roles and responsibilities 
set out in their job description. The frequency of appraisals can vary, but it is not 
uncommon to expect them on a quarterly or annual basis. In addition, interim 
87

88 
meetings will often be built into the performance management cycle between the 
appraiser and appraisee. 
Appraisals are conducted to: 
* 
identify an employee’s current level of performance against their job description 
and personal targets 
* 
identify an employee’s strengths and weaknesses 
» 
allow opportunities for employees to improve their performance 
* 
provide a basis for assessing relevant rewards for employees in relation to their 
contribution to the business’ goals 
* motivate employees 
* 
identify individual training and development needs in line with an employee’s 
career plan 
* 
provide information to aid succession planning. 
There are various forms of appraisal, including formative, summative, 360-degree 
feedback, and self-appraisal. 
Formative 
Formative appraisal takes place at the beginning, middle, and end of a training 
placement, or at regular periods throughout an employment contract. The appraisal 
evidence is used by employees to assess their progress to date and to inform them on 
how to improve their performance. 
A variety of tools and methods can be used with formative appraisal. However, the key 
idea is that employees feel supported along the way and are provided with meaningful 
insights as to what adjustments may be needed, if any, to improve their performance 
and productivity in the business. 
Summative 
A summative appraisal is a written account of an employee’s performance in the work 
environment over the course of the year, documenting their personal achievements 
and contributions against predetermined targets that were set at the start of the year. 
Summative appraisals are useful in holding employees to account and ensuring that 
they are aware of their individual responsibilities and contribution to the wider goals 
of the business. The appraisal will identify areas that they are competent in as well as 
areas that require further development. 
360-degree feedback 
360-degree feedback is a system in which anonymous feedback is gathered about an 
employee, drawn from a variety of colleagues they have working relationships with. This 
may involve managers, subordinates, and peers, as well as a self-evaluation by the employee. 
It is designed to provide a well-rounded view of the individual as several people share 
their opinions — hence, the name ‘360-degree’. It is used as a development tool to cover 
work competencies, behavior, and working relationships, and is commonly used by 
more senior members of staff.

As this method draws on opinions, it can lack factual evidence to support the 
judgments given so is not appropriate for all business contexts and situations. 
Self-appraisal 
Employees may be asked to carry out a self-appraisal against a set of predetermined 
criteria. The results may be compared to an assessment carried out by their line 
manager. This provides a useful starting point for discussion in an appraisal meeting 
as areas of agreement and disagreement can be discussed. However, some employees 
may feel uncomfortable rating themselves and undersell their contributions, 
whereas others may have an inflated opinion of themselves and overrate across the 
categories. 
Advantages of appraisals 
There are many advantages to undertaking regular appraisals: 
* They can identify the true potential and interests of employees. This can support 
the HR department in assigning jobs according to the skills and competencies of 
employees. 
* The process helps employees’ personal and career development. 
+ Appraisals can boost employees’ morale and confidence. A greater awareness of 
one’s true potential motivates employees to give their best performance. 
* The assessment of strengths and weaknesses of employees enables the HR 
department to plan and design training programs to address the needs of the 
business. 
* Performance appraisal is an opportunity for employees to discuss work related 
problems and to find out ways to resolve them, helping to build relationships 
between employees and management. 
* 
Appraisal helps in future planning and development of human resources as they 
can plan to recruit new employees or develop the quality of the existing workforce 
in the organization. 
* 
Appraisals provide a platform to improve employee communication. 
+ Talented employees in the organization can be identified through performance 
appraisals. This information helps the organization in developing competent 
employees ready to apply for promotion opportunities. 
Disadvantages of appraisals 
There are also disadvantages to undertaking appraisals: 
* 
Appraisals are time-consuming. Managers may be required to complete an 
appraisal form for every team member and note down strengths, achievements, 
weaknesses, and other observations. 
* 
Appraisals may not always be carried out by skilled or trained managers. This can 
result in the evaluation process not being carried out properly due to a lack of 
knowledge or experience. 
* Managers may give higher ratings to favorite employees. They may also give low 
ratings to employees they do not like, even if they are competent. 
89

Recruiting internally can save 
a company time, effort, and 
money 
90 
* 
Evaluators may not always select an appraisal method that is suitable for the 
organization. They select an appraisal method that is simple and less time- 
consuming as a way to reduce workload. 
» When someone sees only the negative aspects of a person and ignores their 
positive aspects, this is called the horn effect. It occurs when an appraiser makes 
their decision based only on an employee’s negative attributes. 
» The halo effect is the opposite of the horn effect. Here, the positive qualities of 
the employee overshadow any negative attributes or behavior. The appraiser 
may give high ratings to employees in those areas where they may not be 
proficient. 
» Employees resist the performance appraisal system because they consider that the 
whole process of appraisal is only for pointing out their mistakes and criticizing 
their performance. Thus, they may not be actively involved in the evaluation 
process. 
» 
Appraisal can be an expensive process, particularly if the organization must bring 
in outside experts to design and/or conduct the evaluations. 
* Managers who are strict and have overly high expectations of their employees may 
give low ratings to all employees, despite good performances. Lenient managers 
may give high ratings to all employees irrespective of their performance. Such 
evaluations are not valuable to the organization or the employees. 
Methods of recruitment 
Recruitment methods refer to how an organization finds the right people to employ. 
[n other words, these are ways of establishing contacts with potential candidates. 
Recruitment methods are different from the sources of recruitment. 
Internal recruitment 
[nternal recruitment takes place by drawing on the talent within the organization. 
Internal sources of recruitment are readily available to an organization and primarily 
consist of: 
» 
transfers 
 promotions (through internal job postings) 

« 
re-employment of ex-employees — this is one of the internal sources of recruitment 
in which employees can be invited and appointed to fill vacancies. There are 
situations when ex-employees provide unsolicited applications also. 
One benefit of internal recruitment is that it may lead to an increase in an employee’s 
productivity as their motivation level increases. It also saves time, money, and effort as 
the employee is already associated with the business. 
However, internal recruitment prevents the organization from bringing in fresh ideas 
from external candidates. Moreover, not all workforce requirements can be met from 
within the business, particularly if departments are expanding. 
External recruitment 
External recruitment extends the search for potential employees to outside the 
organization, and can use one or several sources of recruitment. 
* 
Advertisement: This is an external source with an important place in 
recruitment procedure. Advertising can cover a wide area. Traditionally, job 
openings were posted in newspapers, but the internet is now the key job 
advertising medium for businesses, mainly through specialist recruitment 
websites and social media. 
» Employment exchanges and job centers: Some employment exchanges and job 
centers are run by governments. Businesses can often advertise their vacancies free 
of charge, but the jobs posted tend to be low paid or unskilled positions. 
+ Employment agencies: These recruitment consultant firms often specialize in 
industry sectors (such as education or construction) and build a talent pool of job 
seekers that they can match to suitable job vacancies. 
* 
Educational institutions: Many companies visit universities to advertise graduate 
vacancies and recruit from a skilled pool of labor. Often these positions are for 
management level posts. 
+ 
Specialist trade publications: Posting a job in an industry specific publication 
increases the chances that the right audience will see the job vacancy. These 
publications can charge high advertisement fees as they have a captive audience of 
industry specialists. 
+ Employee recommendations: An existing employee may recommend someone 
they have worked with in another organization or role for a specific vacancy. The 
potential disadvantage is that the recommended person may be a poor fit for the 
business. 
» Labor contractors: These supply workers to the manufacturing sector. Through 
these contractors, workers are appointed on a contract basis (for a particular time 
period or project). This is a common recruitment practice in the construction 
industry. 
+ Headhunting: Businesses can approach individuals working in other 
organizations if they are highly sought after for their experience, skill set, and 
expertise in their field. Websites such as LinkedIn have become popular ‘hunting 
grounds’ for talented individuals in professional job roles. 
Toolkit connection 
Hofstede’s cultural 
dimensions help managers 
of international companies 
understand the similarities 
and differences between 
different cultures and develop 
appropriate human resources 
strategies to conduct 
operations in different 
settings. 
The six cultural dimensions 
are: power distance, 
individualism versus 
collectivism, masculinity 
versus femininity, uncertainty 
avoidance, long-term versus 
short-term orientation and 
indulgence versus restraint. 
91

IB learner profile 
Principled 
It can be quite commaon for 
recruiters to headhunt the best 
talent from other organizations. 
Imagine you have been working 
for a business for ten years and 
you are approached with an 
offer from a rival erganization 
in the same city to come and 
work for them, doing the same 
job for a 15 per cent increase in 
salary. They would like you to 
start immediately. 
How would you approach this 
situation? Do you consider 
yourself to be financially 
motivated? What personal 
trade-offs would you be making 
if you decided to accept? 
92 
Human resource management 
Jobseekers have access to a variety of websites to help them find the right job. Job 
listing sites can be generic or industry specific. 
Choose a careerfjob role of interest to you. Carry out a short investigation into the 
websites available to jobseekers in this field. 
Think about: 
» How easy is it to find information on jobs available for your chosen field? 
*  What types of information do employers include in the job advertisement? 
 Apart from listing jobs, what other services do the websites provide for 
employers and jobseekers? 
» Where else might job vacancies be listed for your chosen field? Why? 
Financial rewards 
Salary 
A salary is a yearly fixed financial payment to employees that is paid monthly. As part 
of the contract, the working hours will be stated. If an employee decides to work more 
hours than contracted, they will not be paid any overtime. This is a common form of 
financial reward that can be found in a wide variety of sectors, such as education. 
A key advantage of this method of remuneration is that employees know that they will 
receive the same payment each month and can plan their commitments accordingly. 
Even though overtime is not rewarded, some employees may decide to work beyond 
their stated hours in order to get the job done. If this is a regular occurrence, this may 
cause some resentment. 
Wages 
Wages are commonly paid on a weekly basis and are in recognition of hours worked 
(time based) or output produced (piece rate). This is an easy to understand form of 
remuneration: the more hours you work or items you produce, the more you get paid 
that week. To combat exploitation of workers and ensure that a basic standard of 
living can be maintained, many countries have passed minimum wage legislation that 
employers must abide by. 
A minimum wage is the lowest remuneration that employers can legally pay their 
employees. 
Investigate what the current national minimum wage is in a country of your choice. 
Think about: 
» What are the typical jobs that currently pay the minimum wage in that country? 
* Do you think that the current minimum wage rate is enough to provide a basic 
standard of living for an employee working an average of 40 hours each week?

Commission 
Commission-based pay rewards employees with a set percentage of each sale for 
every item sold or service provided. Often, but not always, employees receive a 
minimal base salary as well as the commission element. This is a common form of 
remuneration in sales-based environments such as car sales showrooms and real 
estate agencies. 
The motivation is to sell, sell, sell, as the more sales that are converted, the greater 
the commission. However, it can foster an environment of unhealthy competition 
as sales agents try to outcompete each other, and hostilities can develop in the 
workplace. 
Case study - Dubai villa sells for 280 million dirhams 
According to news website Gulf News, in 2022, a 24-year-old Irish real estate 
agent, Conor Mckay, sold Dubai’s costliest villa for a record 280 million dirhams 
(approximately $75 million). In this fiercely competitive environment, real estate 
agents are vying to make the next big deal. For a select few, the rewards are high, as 
commission on sales is the most common form of remuneration in this sector. For 
each sale or rental property deal completed, the agent will receive around 2—4 per 
cent of the property price. In some cases, if no sales are made, then agents will not 
receive any pay from the real estate agency they work for. 
1 Define what is meant by commission as a form of financial reward. 
2 Discuss one advantage and one disadvantage of offering commission as the 
main form of financial reward for real estate agencies operating in Dubai. 
Performance-related pay 
Performance-related pay is pay awarded to employees subject to meeting or exceeding 
performance-related targets. On meeting the performance targets, it may result in a 
pay award in the form of: 
» 
cash bonuses 
* 
anincrease in salary or wage 
* 
gratuity pay. 
This can act as a motivator for employees to increase their productivity levels to meet their 
targets. However, it does not always align well across all industry sectors, especially where 
performance can be subjective or difficult to measure, such as for healthcare workers. 
Profit-related pay 
Profit-related pay remunerates employees with a percentage of the annual profits that 
the business earns. This is an added financial reward on top of an employee’s regular 
pay award. Employees have to meet the annual profit targets set by the business, either 
individually, or collectively as a group of staff. 
Profit-related pay can be very lucrative for employees, motivating them to work harder 
and pull together as a team to meet profit targets. More senior employees may be 
eligible for a greater share compared to lower-level employees. However, unrealistic 
profit targets or missing out on a target by a small amount can be demotivating. 
93

94 
Human resource management 
Employee share ownership scheme 
An employee share ownership scheme is another type of financial reward commonly 
offered to employees who work for public limited companies that have shares listed on 
the stock market. Often, there are two main options. 
* The company may give employees a set number of shares as a reward for 
performance or loyalty. 
» 
Employees have the option to put aside part of their monthly salary to purchase 
shares in the company at a discounted rate. At the end of the agreed purchase 
period, they can either keep the shares or cash in at the market price. By taking 
ownership of shares, working hard to increase profits has the tangible benefit of 
greater dividend payments and|or capital gains through increases in the share price. 
However, share ownership schemes dilute ownership of the company as the number of 
shareholders increases. It can also be an expensive scheme to administer. 
Activity 
The John Lewis Partnership is the UK's largest 
employee-owned business and the parent 
company of two retail brands, John Lewis & 
Partners and Waitrose & Partners, which are 
‘ F 
owned in Trust by their 83,900 Partners. 
: 
21 john Lewis 
There are 51 John Lewis & Partners shops 
and 349 Waitrose & Partners shops across 
the UK, along with johnlewis.com and 
waitrose.com. There are also two international sourcing offices, a soft furnishings 
factory, distribution centers, three Waitrose & Partners cookery schools, a content 
production hub, a heritage center, and a Waitrose & Partners farm. 
Over 100 years ago, founder John Spedan Lewis began an experiment into a better 
way of doing business by including staff in decision-making on how the business 
would be run. He set out the principles for how the business should operate and 
produced a written Constitution to help Partners understand their rights and 
responsibilities as co-owners. 
Spedan Lewis wanted to create a way of doing business that was both commerecial, 
allowing it to move quickly and stay ahead in a highly competitive industry, and 
democratic, giving every Partner a voice in the business they co-owned. 
The Partnership is one of 
a handful of companies to have a written 
Constitution. Uniquely, the Constitution places the happiness of its 
Partners (employees) and worthwhile, satisfying employment at the heart 
of its successful business. The Constitution also sets out the Partnership’s 
democratic governance system. 
The Partnership operates on democratic principles, sharing power with 
all Partners. The first democratic council was set up 100 years ago in 1919. 
Today, the democratic network of elected councils, committees, and forums

enables Partners to participate in decision-making, challenge management on 
performance, and have a say in how the business is run. They have over 3,000 
specially elected representatives who feed into the three governing authorities, 
Partnership Council, Partnership Board, and the Chairman, that run the 
Partnership. 
Partners reap the benefits of employee ownership by sharing ‘profit, knowledge, 
and power’. Partners can feed their views to management through the formal 
democracy bodies and through the company’s weekly magazine, which is the 
longest running in-house magazine in the UK. 
Research employee ownership schemes, like the one operated by the John Lewis 
Partnership. Explain the advantages and disadvantages to the employees and the 
business of this scheme. 
Fringe benefits 
Fringe benefits or perks are provided in addition to basic pay (salary or wage) to 
employees. Although not an extra payment to an employee’s bank account, they are 
still classed as financial benefits as they otherwise would have to be paid for by the 
employee. Examples include: 
+ 
staff discounts 
» 
medical insurance 
« 
travel allowance 
+ 
company car 
« 
staff uniforms 
* 
meal allowance 
« gym memberships 
* 
pension contributions 
* 
childcare allowances for children. 
A diverse fringe benefit package can tempt employees into working for the business 
and offer another form of financial motivation. However, as they are provided by the 
business, they do raise the costs of production. 
What is Unlimited PTO? 
Unlimited PTO stands for 
unlimited paid time off. Its 
also sometimes referred 
to as 'discretionary time 
off’, 'unlimited vacation’ 
or 'extended vacation'. 
Microsoft, Netflix and 
Zoom are just some of 
the companies that have 
adopted this policy. 
Unlimited PTO generally 
refers to any vacation 
policy where there is 
no limit to the number 
of days an employee is 
allowed to take off during 
a given year. 
In theory, unlimited PTO 
means employees could 
take weeks - or even 
months - off work at one 
time. However, unlimited 
PTO policies operate on 
the basis that trusted, 
valued and capable 
employees won't abuse the 
policy in this way. 
HR software company 
Namely examined the FTO 
plans offered by 1,000 
businesses they work 
closely with. Interestingly, 
Namely found that 
the average employee 
in a company with an 
unlimited PTO policy took 
an average of just 12.09 
days off per year, whereas 
employees at companies 
with limited PTO policies 
took 11.36 days off. 
-« Many employers offer gym 
membership as an employee 
benefit 
95

96 
Non-financial rewards 
Non-financial rewards are cost efficient for a business as many will not require 
a financial outlay to implement. In addition, the focus is on recognizing the 
employee. 
Developing sound and well-thought-out non-financial rewards can be a powerful tool 
for employee retention. If employees stay just because of pay increases, then they can 
be easily lured away by a rival company. However, non-financial rewards help to build 
working relationships with employees that they may not find elsewhere. 
Job enrichment 
Job enrichment involves employees in a wider variety of tasks that require new skills. 
The focus is on enhancing or ‘enriching’ their experience in the work environment 
by providing more challenging tasks and responsibility at work. This entails more 
training, upskilling, and encouraging workers to take part in decision-making. 
Job enrichment helps to build employee confidence, competence, and a sense of 
achievement in the workplace. Hence, employers gain from a more motivated and 
skilled workforce. However, job enrichment has cost implications for businesses — 
namely the costs of training, developing, and upskilling workers. 
Job rotation 
This form of non-financial motivation involves employees switching between jobs 
over a period of time. This helps to upskill the employees in different tasks and spread 
the existing work skills throughout the organization. Encouraging a variety of work for 
staff in the business guards against repetitive tasks and boredom setting in. However, 
businesses need to be careful not to rotate jobs too frequently as this may hinder 
productivity. 
Job enlargement 
Job enlargement increases the number of tasks involved with a specific job. In 
other words, it means increasing the scope of the duties and responsibilities. Job 
enlargement is a horizontal restructuring method aimed at increasing workforce 
flexibility, and at the same time, reducing boredom that may creep in over time. 
Empowerment 
Empowerment can be a powerful motivator for employees as it involves the delegation 
of power to the workers, helping to increase morale and the feeling of trust and value 
in the business. When given the autonomy (Pink’s theory of motivation) and authority 
to carry out tasks, employees have the responsibility and freedom to conduct their 
day-to-day activities in the way they see fit. This would be the opposite situation to an 
employee who is working under a strict set of guidelines and lacking empowerment. 
Empowerment also gives managers more time to focus on strategic planning as 
they entrust their subordinates with tasks or duties that they may otherwise have to 
complete themselves.

Purpose 
Having a sense of purpose within the work environment is an intrinsic motivator 
and is associated with making a difference on a personal, professional, or social level. 
This drive comes from within and is not something that can be implemented by 
the business. However, it can be fostered or supported, and recognition of the work 
employees are doing helps to reinforce their purpose. 
Often the following fields are associated with ‘purpose’, with people pursuing a career 
in these areas wanting to make a difference rather than focusing on the pay rewards on 
offer: 
* 
social work 
+ 
healthcare 
* 
police 
« 
fire service 
e 
education. 
Teamwork 
Working in teams is a common practice in the business environment and the 
opportunity to do so can be a motivator. Teamwork allows for collaboration and 
social interactions with colleagues (Maslow’s social needs), which can stimulate a 
team approach, whereby employees support each other to reach a common goal. This 
helps to increase job satisfaction and productivity, the number of innovative ideas, 
and improve performance. However, conflicts can arise and people can become too 
dependent on each other. Some may feel they do not get their fair share of credit. 
Facilitating teamwork can carry a financial cost. 
Training 
Training is a key part of human resource management. It involves a learning and 
development process in which employees acquire specific skills, abilities, and 
knowledge to improve their performance. Training includes teaching new employees 
how to perform their job, introducing new technology to existing staff, or helping 
employees to reach a certain level of proficiency in their job functions. Training 
is often focused on improving the performance of the employee in their current 
job activities, whereas coaching or mentoring may be geared toward future job 
functions. 
Induction training 
Induction training is a workplace orientation program, whereby new employees are 
introduced to the rules and regulations of an organization with the main objective of 
familiarizing them with the working environment. 
Typically, new employees will be provided with: 
+ general information about the daily work routine 
+ 
the history, objectives, mission, vision, products, and services of the organization 
¢+ 
adetailed presentation of the company’s policies, work rules, and employee 
benefits. 
Can individual motivation 
only emerge internally, 
or can it be created 
externally? Is there such 
a thing as collective 
motivation? 
97

98 
Advantages 
Induction training has several advantages for a business: 
It helps to retain employees, as turnover can often be much higher with newly 
recruited employees. A comprehensive induction program can help new 
employees settle into the work environment and reduce any initial anxieties they 
may have. 
It creates a positive first impression of the business for new employees. The 
early experiences in a work environment can create a lasting impression for new 
employees. 
An induction program helps the business to inform new employees about desired 
staff conduct as well as the core business values and attitudes expected from them 
while they work at the organization. 
Induction training breaks the ice for new recruits, as they will often be introduced 
to key members of staff within the organization and spend some time getting to 
know their co-workers while they are eased into the job role. 
Disadvantages 
If induction training is not well-thought-out, then there can be some disadvantages: 
The individual(s) providing the training are not well trained themselves. 
New employees are daunted by the initial formalities required (form filling and so 
on). 
Information overload can occur if too much is packed into a short induction 
period. 
Asking new employees to perform challenging tasks when they first join can 
increase the chance of failing and lead to early demoralization. 
On-the-job training 
On-the-job training is instruction for employees that takes place at work. This may 
include job shadowing or observing an experienced employee perform certain job 
tasks, as well as learning how to use any software, tools, or machinery required for the 
job role. 

The instruction and hands-on practice for the employee helps to develop the skills, 
competencies, and knowledge needed. When complete, the employee should be able to 
perform most or all the tasks for the position without supervision. 
Advantages 
+ Experienced staff members can teach new employees the proper protocol, meaning 
they are less likely to pick up bad habits or make mistakes. 
+ 
External training can be expensive; keeping it in-house curbs these costs and 
provides instant access to resources. 
* Employees are more likely to build trust with those they work with over time, so 
on-the-job training promotes teamwork from the start. 
* 
On-the-job training ensures that employees only acquire information on a need- 
to-know basis. 
Disadvantages 
* As the training is usually provided by other employees, it may mean that more 
people are unavailable to work, lowering productivity levels. 
* 
Itis unlikely to bring new ideas and skills into the business. 
* The employee providing the training may be ineffective. 
Off-the-job training 
Off-the-job training is when employees learn more about their job or the latest 
advancements in their field outside their workplace. The idea of this type of training is 
to help employees perform their job more efficiently. 
Employees can express their views and opinions and explore new ideas to bring to the 
workplace. Before the conclusion of the training, employees typically receive some 
form of evaluation, such as a summative test of the knowledge shared with them 
during the training. 
Advantages 
* 
 With training held away from the workplace, employees have fewer distractions. 
They can focus on the learning material and receive the most benefit from the 
training. 
+ 
Off-the-job training requires an investment, meaning employees feel the 
employer values them and their success, often leading to increased motivation 
and loyalty. 
* 
It provides employees with an opportunity to learn from experts in their field, and 
access to new ideas and approaches. 
Disadvantages 
* 
Training courses and the associated expenses (accommodation, travel) can be 
expensive. 
* There is a risk that the newly trained employee may leave the business. 
* 
Training might be generic and not be tailored to the business, limiting its 
application to the employee’s role. 
* The time spent training is time taken from productive working hours. 
99

Human resource management 
Case study - Google’s g2g training program 
2g 
e b 
At Google, 80% of all tracked trainings are run @ 
through an employee-to-employee network 
called ‘g2g’ (Googler-to-Googler). The ‘gig’ 
learning program is created to offer first-hand 
knowledge in different fields, from employees 
to employees. What makes the program so 
successful? Summed up in one sentence, it 
promotes a culture that values learning. 
B 
» 
@ First, Google acknowledges the employees’ 
right to learn. Second, it gives them an 
opportunity to grow with an on-the-job-training 
and allows them to give back to other employees 
by participating in the program. Finally, with 
the glg program, the company trusts 
its 
employees 
‘to 
be 
smart, 
capable 
and 
motivated and have the capacity to grow 
the organization’s learning culture’. 
So, even if the program is of a ‘voluntary @ 
nature, employees care for the value it provides 
both to them and the organization as a whole, 
and support its nurturing power. 
@ According to Google, ‘your own employees 
are perhaps the most qualified instructors 
available to you. The role of the managers in 
. 
establishing a ‘healthy team culture’ for group 
Google’s bite-sized lessons, part of the so-called @ employee learning is immense. 
"Whisper course’ were created to make 
messages ‘stick.” The microlearning method was 
used to remind managers ‘of the importance of 
regularly 
showing 
genuine 
and 
explicit 
. . 
appreciation for their team members.’ A survey 
showed that because of its positive effect, 95% 
. 
of the participants would recommend the 
whisper course to fellow Googlers. 
® Google still 
uses microlearning to nudge 
managers ‘to take action when they receive 
their survey results on how they are doing as a 
L 
_ 
) 
manager. An internal analysis showed that 
Nudggs are, simple Hjlterventmnslthat change .’Google managers who received a whisper 
behavior in a pre_d|ctab|e_ way. Based on 
|asson improved on that behavior in the next 
behavioral economics, wh.|c.h 
stud!es why 
survey by 22-40 percentage points! 
people sometimes make decisions against what 
seems rational or logical, nudges can improve 
work experience in organizations. But only if 
they are transparent and don't limit choice. 
Review the infographic on Google’s g2g training method. 
1 Define the term ‘on-the-job training’. 
2 Explain two advantages of Google adopting the g2g approach to training. 
3 Analyze the potential disadvantages that may be associated with the g2g program. 
100

