Practice questions 
1 
Explain two types of financial awards that a business can use. 
(4 marks) 
2 Explain two types of non-financial awards that a business can use. 
(4 marks) 
3 Using examples, distinguish between on-the-job and off-the-job training. 
(4 marks) 
2.5 Organizational (corporate) culture 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
+ 
describe different cultures and explain the influences on organizational culture 
+ 
identify reasons for the emergence of cultural clashes within and between 
organizations 
+ 
analyze the consequences of cultural clashes within and between organizations 
* 
discuss strategies to address cultural clashes in the workplace. 
To what extent is it possible for an organization to maintain a uniform corporate 
culture when operating globally? 
Culture can be defined as the shared beliefs, meanings, and values that are collectively 
held by a group. It can be characterized in terms of 
a country, a community, an 
ethnicity, or small groups of people, such as a company. 
The success of 
a business depends on many factors, including its organizational 
culture. For example, a clear and consistent organizational culture helps to 
create cohesiveness and purpose. This helps to minimize misunderstandings and 
miscommunications, thereby reducing the chances of conflict in the workplace. 
Organizational culture is influenced by numerous factors, including: 
» 
the size of the organization: larger organizations tend to have more formal policies, 
procedures, and bureaucratic processes 
« 
traditions and values of the organization: for example, a small charity will have a 
different organizational culture to a large multinational fast food restaurant chain 
» 
attitudes and traits of senior managers: organizational culture is shaped by the 
personalities and traits of senior managers, such as their approach to risk-taking 
and risk management 
* 
societal and cultural norms in the region or country: for example, some countries 
(such as in Scandinavia) have greater gender equality, so are more receptive to female 
leadership and female participation in the labor force. Societal norms also shape 
business ethics and corporate social responsibilities of business organizations. 
Although organizational culture is established over a long period of time, it can be disrupted 
by radical changes to the firm. For example, a change in the senior leadership team ora 
takeover of the company can alter the organizational culture in a short period of time. 
101

Zeus continues to influence 
madern thinking and culture 
102 
Types of organizational culture 
Gods of management 
In 1978, management thinker Charles Handy wrote an influential book: Gods of Management: 
The Changing Work of Organizations. In it, Handy attempts to classify four management 
cultures that are present in all organizations, and uses four Greek gods to symbolize them. 
The four cultures are Power (Zeus), Role (Apollo), Task (Athena), and Person (Dionysus). 
Zeus: Power culture 
Zeus, the god of thunder and lightning, is extremely powerful. In a power culture 
organization, decision-making centers around an individual (or 
a small group of 
senior staff), usually the figurehead or founder. Therefore, control radiates from a few 
individuals and their influence. The ‘powerful few’ make most of the decisions. Few 
rules and little bureaucracy characterize this culture; decision-making tends to be 
swift because only a few people hold real power and authority. Often results driven, 
the execution of tasks can be quick, but employees have little autonomy. Because of 
the high level of trust, this type of organization is cheap to operate. However, these 
organizations can quickly turn toxic if there isn’t a strong moral compass at the top of 
the organization, leading to a high staff turnover. 
Apollo: Role culture 
Role culture is associated with Apollo, the son of Zeus and the Greek god of medicine, 
music, art, knowledge, poetry, prophecy, the Sun, light, and so on. Role cultures are 
underpinned by clear policies and hierarchical structures to facilitate the smooth running 
of the business. Employees have clearly defined roles and are conscious of their place in 
the chain of command. Role cultures are commonly found in large organizations, such as 
local and central government, and retail banks. A person’s level in the hierarchy dictates 
the power they wield, and what they're responsible for and who reports to them. 
Organizations with a role culture benefit from a clear direction and stability. However, they 
tend to be risk adverse and can be slow to react to any changes in the external environment. 
Employees may lack initiative as they readily accept direction from their superiors.

Athena: Task culture 
Athena, daughter of Zeus, is the Greek goddess of battle strategy, wisdom, law and 
justice, and civilization, and is considered to be task oriented. In a task culture, teams 
are formed to work on specific areas or solve specific problems with their relevant 
skills. An individual's expertise — and whether the wider group values such expertise — 
determines the power they hold. The task, and its successful completion, is what value 
is placed on. Group dynamics play a part in success as power shifts depending on who 
is in the team, the nature of the problem, or the stage in the task’s completion. 
This is an effective culture in dynamic and creative businesses, especially if the mix of 
people, leadership, and governance is right. This is what a matrix organization looks 
like. This type of culture can be expensive to maintain as hiring, paying, and retaining 
industry experts is not always sustainable over the long term. 
Dionysus: Person culture 
Dionysus is another son of Zeus and is the Greek god of winemaking and theater. In 
a person culture, power is held on an individual level as people regard themselves 
or their skill set as indispensable and more important than the organization itself. 
Effectively, this means the organization only exists to help individuals to achieve their 
personal and professional goals. People with similar training and backgrounds tend 
to accumulate here — the organization is a collective of individuals who are loosely 
aligned, such as a group of barristers or private health professionals. 
Due to the value placed on the individual, generous financial and non-financial 
remuneration packages are essential to recruit and retain staff. In addition, an 
organization with a person culture must manage the different and competing 
personalities and egos of experts in their field. Handy asserts that these types of people 
view themselves as independent professionals who have temporarily lent their services 
or skills to an organization. Person culture can be seen as an expensive approach for an 
organization to adopt. 
Handy says it is important to realize that the most effective organizations are the ones 
that create a balance of power between the gods, and adopt a particular god depending 
on what needs to be done. 
Person culture 
Task culture 
Power 
distribution 
Role culture 
Level of cooperation 
Figure 2.16 The levels of 
cooperation and power 
distribution in Handy's 
organizational culture model 
103

Figure 2.17 The competing 
values framework looks at the 
qualities that make businesses 
104 
effective 
Quinn and Cameron’s competing values framework 
Robert E Quinn and Kim S Cameron of the University of Michigan developed the 
competing values framework to explore corporate culture. They investigated the 
qualities that make businesses effective. Drawn from a list of 39 attributes, the 
researchers identified two key polarities: 
* 
internal focus and integration versus external focus and differentiation 
* 
flexibility and discretion versus stability and control. 
These qualities are shown in the competing values framework in Figure 2.17. 
Competing Values Framework 
Flexibility and discretion 
A 
Clan 
Adhocracy 
Internal focus 
External focus 
and integration 
and differentiation 
Hierarchy 
Market 
\J 
Stability and control 
Clan culture (collaborate culture) 
A clan culture is people-focused in that the company feels family-like, with a primary 
focus on mentorship and teamwork. Communication is prioritized within this work 
environment, and each individual has a sense of value. 
Clan culture aims to break down barriers between senior leaders and employees 
through encouraging mentorship opportunities, and it follows a horizontal leadership 
structure. Being action-oriented and ready to embrace change, those within a clan 
culture display a highly flexible nature. 
Clan cultures are often seen in start-ups and smaller companies where there is a 
heavy emphasis on collaboration and communication, with leaders looking to their 
employees for creativity and ideas. 
Advantages 
Clan cultures can boast of high rates of employee engagement, and happy employees 
make for happy customers. Because of its highly adaptable environment, there is great 
possibility for growth. 
Disadvantages 
Maintaining a family-style corporate culture becomes increasingly difficult as the 
company grows. Utilizing a horizontal leadership structure means day-to-day 
operations can seem cluttered and lacking direction.

Adhocracy culture (create culture) 
Adhocracy cultures are rooted in innovation and adaptability with risk-taking and 
innovation at the forefront. With this approach, these companies are looking to 
develop the next big thing before other businesses and operate at the cutting edge of 
their industry. 
Employees are encouraged to think creatively and bring their ideas to the table. 
Because this type of organizational culture falls within the external focus and 
differentiation category, new ideas need to be tied to market growth and company 
success. 
Google and Apple are companies that embody the external focus and risk-taking 
nature of adhocracy culture. They run on creative energy and doing what has 
never been done before. Adhocracy cultures are common within the ever-changing 
technology industry where new products are being developed and released on a 
regular basis. 
Advantages 
An adhocracy culture contributes to high profit margins. Employees stay motivated 
with a focus on creativity and new ideas, translating into professional development 
opportunities that are easy to justify. 
Disadvantages 
With risk-taking encouraged, there is always a chance that a new venture will not work 
out and may even hurt the business. Unhealthy competition between employees can 
arise as the pressure to come up with new ideas increases. 
Market culture (compete culture) 
Market culture prioritizes profitability through competition and growth. These 
are results oriented businesses where everything is evaluated with the bottom 
line in mind. This leads to a focus on external results over internal satisfaction of 
employees. A market culture revolves around meeting quotas, reaching targets, 
and getting results. Each employee has an objective that aligns with the company’s 
larger goal, and there are often several degrees of separation between employees and 
leadership roles. 
The goal of a market culture company is to be the best in its industry. Because of that, 
these are often larger companies that are already leaders of the pack. 
Advantages 
The focus on delivering results means that there is a key objective employees can get 
behind and work toward. Companies that embody a market culture are profitable and 
successful. 
Disadvantages 
The constant drive for improving numbers, sales, and results means it can be difficult 
for an employee to feel valued as a person, and there is a high risk of burnout in this 
fast-paced and aggressive environment. 
105

In what ways can language 
be used to influence, 
persuade, or manipulate 
employees? 
106 
Human resource management 
Hierarchy culture (control culture) 
Companies with hierarchy cultures adhere to a traditional corporate structure, seen 
as a stable model to adopt. There is a clear chain of command and management tiers 
that separate employees and leadership. There is often a set way of doing things, which 
makes for a stable company that is risk-averse in its approach. 
Hierarchy cultures can be found in companies that are hyper-focused on how 
day-to-day operations are carried out and aren’t interested in changing things 
anytime soon. Established fast food restaurants are a good example of this. 
Advantages 
With internal organization as a priority, hierarchy cultures have clear direction. There 
are well-defined processes that cater to the company’s main objectives. 
Disadvantages 
The company can be slow to adapt to changing trends in the market, as the rigidity of 
hierarchy cultures leaves little room for creativity. The company takes precedence over 
the individual, which doesn’t necessarily encourage employee feedback. 
Ultimately, it falls on the manager 
to recognize the ‘organizational culture’ that 
exists in a business environment and take steps to cultivate and foster that ongoing 
environment, or to look to make changes to steer the business culture in a different 
direction. If 
a manager fails to recognize the existing culture, this can lead to 
employees in the organization pulling in opposite directions while pursuing business 
goals. To understand the cultural aspect of business, it requires managers to possess a 
mix of intelligence quotient (IQ) and emotional quotient (EQ). 
Investigate what role emotional quotient (EQ) plays in the world of business leadership. 
To what extent do you agree that possessing an understanding of your EQ is 
important in helping to shape the culture in an organization? 
Cultural clashes 
Over time, organizations change: this could be because of growth, external factors, or a 
change of leadership. Whatever the reason that causes change, cultural clashes can result. 
Cultural clashes due to mergers and acquisitions 
The primary driver for mergers and acquisitions (M&As) is revenue gain. However, 
M&As rarely take account of cultural differences, which can obstruct a successful 
merger or acquisition. Because culture is an essential element in an organization, 
conducting a cultural analysis is key in an acquisition.

Visible 
Organizational 
When one company looks to acquire another, it may factor in the visible organizational 
culture to its decision and plans, but it may fail to consider invisible organizational 
culture factors. This is best illustrated using the iceberg model, shown in Figure 2.18. 
Failure to account for the full range of factors of the organizational culture (visible and 
invisible) increases the likelihood of culture clashes post-merger. However, managing 
the cultural clash in M&As can result in a post-merger organization that can better 
achieve strategic and financial objectives than either company could do on their own. 
Activity 
One of the most well-known failures in the world of M&As was that of AOL and 
Time Warner, which formally completed in January 2001. At the time, it was one 
of the biggest media mergers in history, with AOL acquiring Time Warner for $182 
billion in stock and debt. The resulting mega-corporation, AOL Time Warner, held 
dominant positions across the media, in music, publishing, news, entertainment, 
cable, and the internet. 
<« Figure2.18 The 
organizational culture 
iceberg 
107

108 
The AOL Time Warner merger came at the height of the ‘internet bubble’, when 
young dot-com businesses were growing quickly with no sign of stopping. 
However, shortly after the merger completed, trouble started. 
In small groups, carry out an investigation into the failure of the AOL Time Warner 
merger. Produce a short report on the key factors that led to the failure, including a 
section providing an insight into the clash of cultures that took place. 
Cultural clashes due to changing leadership style 
Effective leaders recognize that choosing the right leadership style for the current 
situation tends to improve the likelihood of success. However, most leaders have a 
primary style in their management approach. Cultural traditions and values play a 
role in a leader’s style, so it is expected that cross-cultural differences in leadership 
will arise. 
Google acquired Nest, a smart-home start-up, for its automation capabilities and 
innovation in 2014. Given Nest’s history with Apple, it was more structured in its 
approach, whereas Google’s approach was more informal. The CEO of Nest, Tony 
Fadell, left the business due to how his approach and leadership style differed from that 
of Alphabet (Google's parent company). Many other Nest employees also left. 
Nest was a company with a transparent top-down approach, whereas Google was 
more engineer-driven and had a bottom-up culture. The change in leadership style 
experienced by Nest employees was not something they were accustomed to or 
welcomed, and subsequently led to cultural clashes and friction. 
Multinational expansion 
The expansion of companies across borders drives globalization. Mergers, 
acquisitions, joint ventures, and subsidiaries do not result in a standardized corporate 
culture, and often give rise to culture clashes. 
Organizations’ hierarchies vary across countries. For example, a US company may 
have a very egalitarian culture with a very flat structure, with four or five levels of 
hierarchy. When trying to transfer this approach to another location, it may not 
work, as people may organize themselves into hierarchies quite quickly. What seems 
egalitarian in one country may seem authoritarian in another. 
In addition, methods of motivating people can be very different. A Harvard business 
professor, Lynne Paine, noted that Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian countries tend to 
be more individualistic, whereas Asian and Latin American cultures tend to be more 
group-oriented. Therefore, putting an emphasis on individual performance can be a 
mistake in a place where the team is viewed as paramount. 
For companies in developing countries, the pressure to adhere to Western norms can 
be especially strong. For example, a company hoping for investment from the West 
might install a code of ethics that prohibits conflicts of interest in supply contracts. 
But in many countries, doing business with companies owned by family members is 
standard practice.

Case study - Starbucks 
Behind a secure door at Starbucks Corp. headquarters 
lies a technology lab where the chain is plotting its 
renewal and rethinking the corporate culture of its 
establishments. That includes rethinking the onerous 
path its baristas must take to make a Frappuccino. 
Inside the 20,000-square-foot space called the Tryer Center, baristas working in a 
mock-up of a Starbucks cafe walked back and forth between refrigerators, blenders, 
and syrups to make a single blended coffee topped with cold foam and caramel 
drizzle. They asked if the company could build kitchens that bring the equipment 
closer together and make syrup pumps, milk dispensers, and ice bins that work better. 
Natarajan Venkatakrishnan, who is in charge of the center, is testing a new machine 
that could reduce the time it takes to make cold brewed coffee. He also wants 
Starbucks to have better blenders. ‘Today, you go to a Starbucks store, you take this,’ 
Mr. Venkatakrishnan said, holding up one of the blenders currently in use. ‘You put a 
cap on it, you put it in, you blend it, you pour it out, you have to rinse this, you have 
to rinse the lid. All of that takes time.’ ‘It’s the complexity of those cold beverages, 
Mr. Schultz said in a recent interview. 
Starbucks, the chain that made espresso ubiquitous in America, now faces daily 
crises in dispensing it. U.S. stores designed a decade ago struggle to meet today’s 
consumer demand. Cafes that once averaged 1,200 orders a day are now trying to 
make 1,500. Executives recently visited one East Coast cafe that averaged $1 million 
in annual sales a decade ago. Now, it is ringing up nearly $3 million in sales in the 
same 1,500-square-foot space. 
Many U.S. locations need to be overhauled, said Katie Young, who as senior vice president 
of global growth and development is in charge of figuring out what new cafes should look 
like. Having so much demand is a privilege for Starbucks, but also a problem, she said. 
Starbucks was hit hard by the pandemic. By last year, to-go orders had helped sales 
recover to prepandemic levels, but this year, rising costs have begun eating into 
profit margins, and the company has raised prices. In the quarter ended July 3, 
Starbucks reported that sales had risen 9% from the year-earlier period, but net 
income dropped 21%. 
Executives also are grappling with a unionization push that began in its Buffalo, 
N.Y., market in August 2021. Workers have been pressing for better pay, staffing 
levels and hours. Turnover has shot up since the pandemic hit. One in four U.S. 
baristas are quitting their jobs within 90 days, according to internal figures, up from 
roughly one in 10 previously. 
Starbucks, the world’s largest coffee company by locations and sales, started out by 
selling coffee to office workers in cities such as Seattle. Mr. Schultz took over in 1987 
with the goal of bringing Italian-style espresso to Americans, building stores with 
small prep areas to brew a limited number of offerings. As Starbucks expanded, so 
did its menu. It started serving Frappuccinos in 1995, and pumpkin spice latte and 
other flavors and toppings followed. Warm sandwiches came in 2003. It introduced 
cold brew and draft nitro coffee in the 2010s. 
109

Human resource management 
In 2015, the company launched an app feature that allowed customers to pay for 
their drinks ahead of time and to customize their coffee orders in what Starbucks 
says are 170,000 ways. 
At the Tryer Center recently, barista Lisa Koss demonstrated the steps required to 
create one popular drink, an Iced Caramel Macchiato. Ms. Koss first dispensed shots 
from the espresso machine at the hot-bar section of the cafe, then crossed the floor 
to whip cold foam in a blender. She walked back to the hot bar to collect the espresso 
shots and grab milk from a refrigerator. She headed back to the cold bar for the foam, 
bent down to scoop ice, then poured the drink together. It took about three minutes to 
make. Other popular drinks require even more steps. ‘There’s usually so much walking 
and bending, that after eight hours, it hurts,’ said Greg Pieczynski, another barista. 
Starbucks expects workers to deliver handcrafted beverages fast. A clipboard in 
one Buffalo Starbucks, used to track workers’ drive-through delivery times, said 
‘Expectations: Under 50 Seconds,’ according to a photo provided by one barista. 
Starbucks said there isn't a standard time for drive-through service because each 
location is unique, but that service in 50 seconds or less is ideal. In the company’s 
early years, baristas served coffee over the counter. Starbucks tested its first 
drive-through in 1994, and by 2009, more than one-third of the company-owned 
locations in North America had them. Now, nearly half of Starbucks’s U.S. sales 
come from drive-through orders. Mr. Schultz wants 90% of the chain’s new stores to 
include drive-throughs—continuing a shift that he acknowledged has contributed 
to new pressures on workers. 
Baristas’ frustrations played into a unionization effort that began in certain stores. 
Workers have lobbied for better pay, equipment and operations. “We love our 
regulars. We have their orders memorized,” said Mr. Hudson, who has worked for 
Starbucks for more than four years. “‘We know it's annoying to wait for that food or 
when our equipment is down.’ 
Starbucks has upgraded equipment periodically, including in the past year adding 
espresso machines that can pull three shots for complex orders, rather than two. 
The pandemic delayed some of the equipment installations, the company said. Amid 
workers’ calls for better store conditions, Starbucks executives formed a team to 
focus on what more they could do to improve cafe operations and productivity. They 
gathered at the Tryer Center to try to speed up the time it took Starbucks to launch new 
ideas. Starbucks has told employees that the company hopes to have new equipment 
and designs rolling out to its stores as soon as possible over the coming years. 
1 Define the term ‘corporate culture’. 
2 Evaluate how the culture of Starbucks has been impacted by the large-scale 
growth of the business. 
Practice questions 
1 
Outline two factors that can influence organizational culture. 
(4 marks) 
Using Charles Handy’s Gods of Management model, select and apply 
one type of organizational culture to a business you are familiar with. 
(4 marks) 
3 Using real world examples, to what extent is culture clash 
inevitable when two businesses merge together? 
(10 marks) 
110

