2.6 Communication 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
+ examine formal methods of communication 
+ examine informal methods of communication 
* 
analyze the barriers to communication in a business. 
How can effective communication impact business success? 
Formal and informal communication 
Clear and timely communication is crucial in ensuring a well-run and efficient 
business organization. Within a business environment, methods of communication 
can be classified into formal and informal methods. Depending on the given situation, 
it is for the business to decide whether formal or informal methods of communication 
are the most appropriate vehicle for the message to be delivered. 
Formal communication refers to the official flow of information through predefined 
channels and routes. Formal communication will often align with the organizational 
structure, usually following the hierarchical structure through the chain of 
command. Information flows down from senior members of staff 
to employees at 
lower levels in the organization. 
Informal communication is free flowing throughout the organization and travels 
outside the bounds of the formal communication channels. It is quick and often 
natural as it happens with everyday interactions with colleagues around the 
workplace. Topics may 
be work related but can stray into outside interests, thus 
helping to build relationships. Due to the nature of informal communication, it does 
not leave a paper trail and is often known as the ‘grapevine’. Table 2.3 on page 114 
shows the key differences between formal and informal communication. 
Types of formal communication 
Formal communications include: 
* 
anintranet 
* 
letters 
* 
meetings 
* 
presentations 
» 
conferences 
* 
speeches 
* 
one-to-one meetings 
» 
notice boards 
* bulletin boards 
* 
organizational blogs 
* 
handouts 
* 
emails from managers and leaders. 
111

Informal communications 
flow through chains of peaple 
Types of informal communication 
There are four key types of informal communication: 
+ 
Single strand chain: A shares an idea or information with B, who then passes it to 
C, and so on. 
* Gossip chain: This is the same idea as in social circles, whereby one person 
initiates the conversation and shares information with a group of people, who then 
pass on the information to more people. 
* Cluster chain: In cluster networks, a person will receive information and choose 
to pass it on to their cluster network or keep the information to themselves. An 
individual will pass on the information to the next cluster network. Think of how 
a social media challenge becomes viral: people do something unique and tag three 
friends for the challenge. They complete the challenge and tag three more people 
each, and so on. That’s how a cluster chain communication is formed and continues. 
* Probability chain: Each individual randomly tells another individual the same 
piece of information. 
Table 2.3 Key differences between formal and informal communication 
consuming and costly because the 
information and channels are checked for 
errors before being issued to the public or 
person intended. 
Feedback is an essential component 
required to complete a formal 
communication chain, because of which, 
the information may get a little delayed. 
Factor to consider 
Differences 
Formal 
Informal 
Official versus 
It is mainly written. The management is 
These communication channels exist in 
unofficial 
responsible for the timely and accurate use | every organization but are not used for 
of these formal communication channels. | official purposes. Serve as a medium for 
employees to interact personally and build 
better relations. 
Reliability 
Considered more reliable due to the records | Informal communications are mostly 
that are left behind. 
verbal, and there is no definite channel and 
supporting documents, making it a little 
less credible. It is easier for the message to 
be distorted. 
Time 
Formal communication can be time- 
Informal communication spreads faster 
as it can be started at any level of the 
organization and is quick to travel. 
Information flow 
Information through formal communication 
is only through predefined channels. 
Information through informal 
communication moves freely. 
Secrecy 
Secrecy is maintained with formal 
communication. 
Informal communication makes it hard to 
maintain full secrecy due to its reliance on 
individuals. 
112 

Barriers to communication 
Anything that hinders or stops the business delivering the correct message to the right 
person at the right time, or a receiver from receiving the right message at the right 
time, is a communication barrier. The following are some of the barriers to business 
communication in a work environment. 
* Organizational structure complexity: Due to many filtering points, 
communication in an organization with multiple administrative levels leads to 
transmission loss and poor retention. If there are a lot of layers in an organization 
for the message to travel through, then some or all the information included in the 
message may be lost. This is a particular problem with oral communication. Poor 
retention of the message is also a major stumbling block. People cannot retain 
knowledge for lengthy periods of time if they are not attentive or engaged. 
» 
Status: Communication between people with different statuses and positions can 
be challenging as they are unable to speak freely with one another. 
« 
Insufficient incentives: Employees may be full of rich ideas and creativity but 
remain subdued in making useful recommendations if they are not rewarded or 
appreciated due to a lack of incentives. 
* Lack of confidence in subordinates: If a supervisor has doubts about their 
subordinates’ skills, they will not ask for their advice or comments. 
* Reluctance to communicate: Some employees struggle to communicate, 
and engaging with them can be challenging. Some people may be unwilling to 
communicate due to fear of rejection or of other negative consequences. 
* 
Linguistic differences: Conversing with an employee who doesn’t speak your 
language fluently can make it difficult to reach a shared understanding. That’s why 
language can be a major barrier to communication. This isn’t just about different 
dialects, but about jargon too. If a marketing team member is talking to someone 
from the finance team using ‘business speak’ like ‘PPC’ and ‘top of the funnel’, 
confusion is inevitable. 
* Emotional: An emotional barrier is a mental block that influences how you 
perceive others’ actions and prevents you from clearly communicating your 
feelings. Emotional barriers can trigger an emotional response that’s inappropriate 
or unproductive. 
+ Physiological: Physical limitations, such as ill health, a vision or hearing 
impairment, or limited mobility, can become a barrier to effective communication. 
* 
Psychological: There are many psychological barriers to communication that can 
affect a workplace: 
o Filtering is the withholding or framing of information to manage others’ 
reactions, such as an employee telling their manager that their laptop is broken, 
but not mentioning that they'd spilled their coffee on it. 
o Selective perception is when people filter information to suit their own needs. 
Often subconscious, this includes making assumptions based on experience, 
like assuming someone is angry when they use all capital letters in a typed 
message. 
o Information overload happens when there is too much information to 
process in the allotted time. This may occur when there are too many ads on a 
website, or when someone is responding to emails during a business meeting 
and can'’t focus on either the emails or the meeting particularly well. 
IB learner profile 
Communicators 
Think of a time when you 
wanted to get a message 
across, but the outcome was 
not what you hoped for. What 
was the barrier or barriers 
that prevented effective 
communication taking place? 
113

Human resource management 
o Emotional disconnect occurs when someone is upset or preoccupied. 
Emotional disconnect may be caused by the communicators or it may be 
unrelated, like when a loved one is ill. 
o Biased language can offend or stereotype people without the speaker being 
aware of it. A man, for example, excludes women and non-binary people in his 
audience if he only uses ‘he’ when providing examples in case studies. 
Case study — Maersk 
At the end of 2021, the world’s largest container shipping company, AP Moller- 
Maersk announced its most profitable quarter ever, and it was on course to deliver 
the highest profits of any Danish company in history. 
However, not everything was running quite as smoothly internally. Maersk’s 
attempt to rebrand itself from a container shipping company to a technology-led, 
end-to-end logistics provider was creating tensions. 
A senior IT executive appeared to suggest that the ships that move 20 per cent of 
global trade were no longer at the heart of Maersk’s mission. The group ‘used to be 
an industrial company that had technology on [the] side’, he said in an interview. 
‘Now it's a technology company where we have some physical devices we need to 
move around.’ 
A few other comments from the software engineer about the business of moving 
cargo (‘It's about more than stuffing things into boxes and sailing them around the 
earth’) sparked fury on social media. 
‘l am very sorry, but I will have to correct you," wrote a veteran Maersk sea captain, 
who is also the employee representative on the board. ‘But we are NOT a tech 
company who “happens” to operate ships,” he said on LinkedIn. The maritime 
business contributes 78 per cent of group revenue. Without the group’s 12,000 
seafarers, there would be no Maersk. 
There is nothing unusual about tensions emerging when strategic changes are afoot. 
After a century of moving goods mainly by sea, Maersk is expanding into other 
modes of freight transport and connecting up the platforms digitally. 
Increasingly, supply-chain logistics is about the flow and visibility of information, as 
well as the ability to quickly identify and resolve problems, no matter where on the 
Earth the goods are. 
How Maersk deals with the tensions that arise from these changes could 
determine the success or failure of its transformation. ‘It's not the strategy 
that is wrong,’ said Lars Jensen, chief executive of shipping consultancy 
Vespucci Maritime and author of 
a book on the Danish group. ‘It is more in the 
communication ... How do you perceive yourself? What is the core business? Is it 
to move boxes or information?’ 
In 2017, a study by technology consultant Capgemini and digital analyst Brian Solis 
highlighted a sharp difference in perception about digital transformation between 
company executives and those on the ground. 
Some 85 per cent of top executives believed their organizations promoted 
collaboration on digital transformation internally, but only 41 per cent of 
employees agreed. While 71 per cent of leaders said discussions about novel 
114

