business initiatives using new technology were open to all employees, only 41 per 
cent of those workers felt this was true. 
Maersk’s social media spat shows the findings are still relevant. ‘The fact that this 
has boiled over into the public domain is genuinely very unusual at Maersk,’ said 
Jensen. ‘It should be a discussion that takes place internally. But I suspect there are 
people who feel they are not being heard.’ 
Navneet Kapoor, chief technology and information officer, insists the public debate is 
not a sign of a disconnect over the company’s mission. ‘At the leadership level ... we take 
great pride in our legacy and the fact that we have a huge network of assets, he told the 
Financial Times. That message appears to have been lost in transmission to the grassroots 
—whether to the crew of Maersk’s 700 ships or to the digital side of the business. 
Pretending these tensions do not exist would be foolish. But both sides have to 
adapt. Maersk’s core business is neither technology nor shipping. It is both, and 
more. The only message that needs to be conveyed is that neither side on its own 
will shape Maersk’s future. Nor will one prosper without the other. 
1 Define the term ‘formal communication’. 
2 Define the term ‘informal communication’. 
3 Explain one barrier to communication that can be seen in this case study. 
4 Recommend a suitable form of communication that Maersk could have used 
to communicate its strategy to rebrand from a container shipping company to 
a technology-led, end-to-end logistics provider to its employees. 
Practice questions 
1 
Explain two factors that can act as barriers to communication 
in a business. 
(4 marks) 
2 Using real world examples, examine one business scenario where 
formal and one business scenario where informal communication 
methods would be most suitable. 
(10 marks) 
2.7 Industrial/employee relations 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
identify and explain sources of workplace conflict 
« 
discuss approaches to conflict in the workplace from an employee perspective 
+ 
discuss approaches to conflict in the workplace from an employer perspective 
* 
evaluate approaches to conflict resolution in the workplace. 
How might consumers be impacted by workplace conflicts in an organization? 
115

116 
Sources of conflict in the workplace 
Conflict in the workplace can arise for a multitude of reasons, but let's look at some of 
the primary causes. 
Fear of the unknown and resistance to change 
One of the common causes of conflicts in the workplace is the resistance that 
employees show to change, coupled with a fear of the unknown if a new management 
team has been brought in. Employees can get comfortable with familiar working 
practices, and changes in the work environment can result in confusion, denial, and 
workplace conflict between management and team members. 
Poor work habits 
Certain individual habits can be harmful to the harmony in the workplace and 
become a cause of conflict. These might be linked to arriving late, creating a messy 
environment, or things that may be harmless in intention, such as being extra diligent 
in checking work multiple times. 
Unclear job expectations 
As part of the induction process, employees should be made aware of their roles and 
responsibilities. If this doesn't happen, it can become difficult for 
a new employee to 
understand how to do their job effectively. Unclear job expectations are one of the 
most common causes of conflict in the workplace, and even existing employees may 
find themselves in this position. 
Poor communication 
The importance of clear communication was highlighted earlier in this unit. 
Employees need access to important information. However, businesses don't 
always get this right, and poor communication is a common cause of conflict in the 
workplace. 
Personality differences 
Organizations can be a melting pot of people with different backgrounds, cultures, 
preferences, experiences, temperaments, demographics, and capabilities working 
together. Although it is expected that employees will come together for the good of the 
organization, sometimes this is not possible, and the individual differences become so 
great that there is no longer any mutual respect among certain co-workers. This has a 
direct impact on workplace relationships. 
Toxic work culture, abusive conduct, and bullying 
These lead to unhappiness and negativity in the workplace. Abusive conduct or 
bullying can lead to serious repercussions if left unchecked. 
Misunderstandings related to policies and practices 
Policies and practices help an organization to run successfully. Too many, however, can 
mean they become difficult to remember and follow. If the policies or practices are too

complex, implementation by employees may be ineffective. Such misunderstandings 
can result in workplace conflict. 
Approaches to conflict in the workplace 
Having identified how conflicts may arise in the workplace, it is important to consider 
how employees and employers can approach conflict when faced with it. 
Employee approaches to conflict 
Collective bargaining 
Collective bargaining is the official process by which representatives of trade unions 
negotiate with employers on behalf 
of their members with respect to employees’ terms 
and conditions of employment. The idea is that more can be achieved by workers 
coming together collectively than by working alone to improve employee benefits and 
rights at work. 
Collective bargaining between employers and trade unions can range from 
negotiations on specific matters arising daily within the workplace to extensive 
periodic negotiations on terms and conditions of employment affecting the whole 
workforce. Common issues pursued through this process include pay increases, and 
improved terms of employment and working conditions (such as working hours, 
holidays, pension contributions). 
Work-to-rule 
Work-to-rule is a form of protest in which employees do exactly what is stated 
in their contracts, and nothing more, in order to slow down productivity in the 
business. A work-to-rule is seen as a way to protest against low pay or bad working 
conditions. In addition to slowing down production, it indicates the end of an 
employee’s goodwill. Goodwill is the gap between the minimum someone needs to 
There are many reasons 
conflict in the workplace 
for 
117

How might emotive 
language and faulty 
reasoning be used in 
collective bargaining 
situations? 
118 
do to keep their job, and the maximum they will do if they are really excited about 
doing it. It is something that is completely at the discretion of the individual and often 
helps businesses to go that extra mile in the production of their goods or provision of 
their services. 
Strike action 
Strike action is a work stoppage caused by the mass refusal of employees to work. A strike 
usually takes place in response to employee grievances. Most strikes are undertaken as a 
last resort by labor unions during collective bargaining. A strike may consist of workers 
refusing to attend work or picketing outside the workplace to prevent or dissuade people 
from working in their place or conducting business with their employer. 
Employer approaches to conflict 
Threats of redundancies 
Depending on the conflict that arises, an employer may issue a threat of redundancies 
to employees involved in the conflict. Redundancy is a form of dismissal. It happens 
when employers need to reduce their workforce as there is no longer any need for a job 
role. If redundancies do occur, employees might be eligible for redundancy pay, which 
the employer needs to factor into the costs of the decision. 
Changes of contract 
Ongoing conflicts may result in the employer moving to change the terms and 
conditions in employee contracts. The degree of change and ability to make the change 
will be governed by the employment law in that context. In most circumstances, an 
employer can’t change a contract without consent. Even with a clause in employee 
contracts, employers must still talk about the changes they plan to make with each 
employee affected. If they don’t do that and go ahead anyway, they risk breaching the 
contract, which can have legal consequences. 
Lockouts 
Alockout is a work stoppage or denial of employment through a temporary closure of 
the workplace initiated by the management of a company during a labor dispute. This 
tactic aims to hinder union organization or to gain leverage. 
Closure 
Closures differ from lockouts in that they result in the permanent closure of the 
business itself, not just a temporary workplace shutdown. This can be seen as the most 
severe reaction to a workplace conflict by the employer. 
Collective bargaining 
Employers may decide to engage with the collective bargaining process by dealing with 
the employees’ unions. This approach from employers engages with the workers over 
the conflict at hand. Some employers recognize the benefits that come from voluntary 
union recognition, such as being able to negotiate wages and other contractual 
terms and conditions collectively for large groups of workers at the same time. Most 
employers are also readily prepared to recognize the existence of a trade union where 
there is significant support among the workforce.

Approaches to conflict resolution 
Conciliation and arbitration 
Conciliation draws on a mediator to help facilitate negotiations during the conflict 
resolution process. Each party involved in the conflict is met by the independent 
mediator who helps to resolve their differences. The mediator will aim to encourage 
both parties to come to an agreement (not legally binding) that is mutually beneficial, 
often requiring a degree of compromise on the part of each side. 
If the conflict situation is not resolved through conciliation, it can then move to 
arbitration. With arbitration, an independent arbitrator decides on the most appropriate 
outcome after reviewing the demands of both parties involved in the conflict. Unlike 
conciliation, the decision made by the independent arbitrator is legally binding. 
While helping to avoid even costlier legal battles in court, conciliation and arbitration 
can still take a lot of time and money. 
Employee participation and industrial democracy 
Employee participation means that workers are given responsibilities and autonomy 
to do their jobs. By empowering employees, this provides a sense of ownership and a 
level of accountability in relation to their job role, helping to improve staff morale in 
the workplace. Industrial democracy is an arrangement that involves workers making 
decisions, and sharing responsibility and authority in the workplace. Workers are 
treated as responsible partners of an enterprise and are allowed to participate in the 
decision-making process through different methods. There are clear links here to 
motivation theory; Maslow and Herzberg would say this helps to improve staff morale 
and labor productivity (see Section 2.4 Motivation and demotivation). 
Encouraging employee participation and industrial democracy should result in 
improved industrial relations in an organization. A sense of belonging is fostered, as 
teamwork and collaboration become the norm, meaning the employer benefits from a 
participative workforce who help toward problem solving. 
However, there are some disadvantages for the employer to consider: 
* Technology and organizations are complex: specialized work roles are required, 
making it difficult for people to participate successfully if they go very far beyond 
what they are familiar with. 
* 
Issues can arise when workers make suggestions in areas that they do not know or 
do not have experience in. 
* Employee participation can be used by management, unions, or experts to 
manipulate employees. 
* 
Participation does not transfer 
to all cultural contexts. The feudalistic concept of 
the master and the servant is still prevalent in some cultures. Workers may have an 
innate feeling that they are born to serve and not to rule. 
*+ 
Frustration can build among employees if their suggestions are not accepted by 
management. 
119

120 
Human resource management 
No-strike agreement 
A no-strike agreement is a provision in a collective bargaining contract in which the 
union promises that, during the life of the contract, the employees will not engage 
in strikes, slowdowns, or other job actions. A union often agrees to such a clause 
in exchange for some concessions on the part of the employer, such as a grievance 
arbitration process or resolving other matters of industrial unrest. 
A no-strike agreement rules out aggressive approaches to settling disagreements, 
thus avoiding the problems associated with strikes for the employer, such as lost 
productivity. In addition, if union members disregard the agreement and go forward 
with strike action, the employer then has the legal right to discipline or even dismiss 
employees. 
A key disadvantage for the employer is that to seal the no-strike agreement, they must 
compromise on some of the union’s demands. Such compromises could come at a 
high cost to the employer. 
Single-union agreement 
A single-union agreement describes the arrangement between a company and its 
employees that states that the company will discuss pay, working conditions, and so 
on, with one main trade union. 
Some companies have multiple unions dealing with different employees within 
it. Each union competes with other unions for their group’s employment rights 
and for improvements to working conditions and pay. As such, there is a lot of 
competition that leaves the management unwilling to cooperate with any union 
group. The advantage for the employer of single-union agreement is increased clarity 
and efficiency in negotiations, as one union represents all interests, which prevents 
conflicting goals from multiple unions at the negotiating table. 
Case study - Italian unions sign a collective bargaining 
agreement with Amazon 
In May 2022, facilitated by worker activism, unions in Italy signed a collective 
bargaining agreement with Amazon. 
Amazon, one of the largest companies in the world, has reportedly long 
discouraged staff from organizing,’ and, according to one source, it allegedly 
refuses ‘in principle to recognize trade unions as collective representatives of 
workers’ interests’. However, in ltaly, Amazon signed agreements that recognize 
unions as the workers’ representatives, set company-specific requirements for 
hours and worker protections, and oblige the firm to comply with relevant sectoral 
agreements that set minimum compensation and other standards for entire 
industries. Moreover, the contracts cover direct employees of Amazon and also 
temporary workers and those who make the ‘last-mile’ delivery (often other firms 
or independent contractors). 
Workers secured recognition of their unions as well as significant improvements 
in pay and working conditions for direct employees and indirect workers. Despite 
significant efforts, Amazon workers in other countries have not achieved anything 
close to that of Italian workers and their unions.

Three factors were critical in enabling Italian unions to sign a collective bargaining 
agreement with Amazon. 
Pressure from workers 
Amazon workers in Italy conducted a 24-hour strike seeking recognition of their 
unions and to secure a collective bargaining agreement with the company. The 
strike included workers throughout Amazon’s Italian delivery chain — including 
warehouse workers, drivers, and contractors — and was much bigger and broader 
than previous Italian strikes against Amazon. Union leaders said that about 70 to 
75 per cent of direct employees working in warehouses and delivery went on 
strike, as did about 25 to 30 per cent of temporary workers. The strike significantly 
disrupted Amazon’s operations and delayed deliveries. 
Supportive policy environment 
Italian Minister of Labor Andrea Orlando intervened and summoned Amazon 
and the unions for discussions. The minister did not directly negotiate, but rather 
offered a place for the negotiations and encouraged them. The minister wanted 
the parties to come to an agreement and apparently pushed them to do so. As 
Orlando stated after the September 2021 agreement was finalized, ‘I express great 
satisfaction with the agreement signed today ... It is good news, desired and urged 
by the Ministry.’ 
Sectoral bargaining system 
The Italian sectoral system means industry-wide compensation applies to all 
workers in that sector. The sectoral agreements put pressure on Amazon while 
making it less costly for the company to sign an agreement. Amazon aims to 
portray itself as an important community actor in Italy, promoting needed jobs in 
impoverished communities as well as academic scholarships, yet failing to comply 
with required sectoral standards made its reputation vulnerable. In the Italian 
system, collective bargaining coverage is the norm, and Amazon stuck out as an 
outlier by not complying with the sectoral agreement. 
1 Define the term ‘collective bargaining’. 
2 Describe two reasons why Amazon may be reluctant to recognize the role of 
trade unions. 
3 Explain one advantage and one disadvantage of collective bargaining for 
Amazon workers in Italy. 
Practice questions 
1 
Explain two sources of conflict that can arise in a business setting. 
(4 marks) 
2 Using real world examples, analyze the impact of employees taking 
strike action on a business. 
(6 marks) 
3 Towhatextentis it in the best interests of a business to encourage 
employee participation in helping to resolve a conflict? 
(10 marks) 
121

Human resource management 
In this unit, you have learned: 
* Human resource management plays an essential role in the modern business 
environment. 
* 
Organizational structures define how employees are coordinated and 
communicated with in a business setting. 
» 
Managers plan, make decisions, organize, lead, monitor, and evaluate. 
* 
Leaders motivate people to understand and believe in a company’s vision and to 
work on achieving the company’s goals. 
* 
Businesses encourage employees to work productively through motivation. 
* 
Organizational culture is the shared beliefs, meanings, and values held by its 
leaders, managers, and employees, and it is key to an organization’s success. 
* 
Clear and timely communication is crucial in ensuring a well-run and efficient 
business operation. 
* 
Conflicts arise in the workplace for a wide variety of reasons, and employees and 
employers can use different approaches to resolving those conflicts. 
122

‘ 
' 
e 
LTI, 
E 
Vs .‘m — 
“3 
> 
.-. 
A o 

