The triple bottom line 
{also known as TBL or 
3BL} is a framework 
with three key parts: 
social, environmental (or 
ecological), and financial. 
Some organizations 
have adopted the 
triple bottom line 
frarmework to evaluate 
their performance on 
a broader perspective 
to create greater 
organizational value. 
The triple bottom line 
refers to the following 
three ‘pillars’. 
+ People (social): where 
an organization 
practices fair and 
equitable treatment of 
its employees and other 
internal and external 
stakeholders. 
+ Planet (environmental): 
a firm's commitment 
to minimize the 
environmental 
impact of its business 
operations. 
+ Profit (financial): 
which is achievable 
without comprising 
any of the previous 
pillars. Profit is the 
reward for successful 
entrepreneurial activity, 
but any social or 
environmental negative 
impacts should 
be included when 
reporting profitability. 
124 
Finance and accounts 
Conceptual understandings 
* Change in the business structure can impact a business’ financial resources. 
 Creativity in financial reporting can have diverse impacts in a business. 
* 
Ethical financial and accounting practices can be a form of sustainable 
business behavior. 
3.1 Introduction to finance 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
s 
explain the role of finance in business 
» 
distinguish between capital and revenue expenditure. 
These are questions based on themes within this unit that you could conduct some 
independent research about. You could explore: 
* How can cost and revenue management ensure sustainability? 
*  Why could final accounts analysis be essential in changing stakeholder perspectives? 
*  Why might profitable businesses face insolvency? 
* How can time value of money affect future consumer choice? 
* How can triple bottom line accounting support the shift toward more ethical 
business practices? 
While many businesses no longer measure their success by profit alone, money plays 
a key role in overall business activity. Finance or funding needs to be obtained and 
managed carefully to meet the needs of society in a sustainable manner. 
Finance is about businesses obtaining the money needed to help them buy or do 
something for a particular purpose. For example, a coffee shop may need to raise 
money to buy an espresso machine to make its coffee products. The different types of 
expenditures (or payments) and different ways a business can fund its activity will be 
the focus during the first part of this unit. 
Later in the unit, we will expand our understanding of finance to look at how 
businesses manage their money. We will explore the different ways in which 
businesses record and analyze their financial situation, and how financial tools and 
techniques can be used to help make managerial decisions. 
First, we will look at the two main categories of expenditures for a business: capital 
expenditure and revenue expenditure. 
Capital expenditure 
Capital expenditure is the spending by a business on any long-term or non-current 
assets (assets that are used for more than one year), like buildings, machinery, and 
equipment. For example, many businesses purchase office equipment and technology

o A coffee shop needs to 
purchase specialized 
equipment 
like computers or phones for their managers and employees. These purchases are all 
examples of a capital expenditure. 
Capital expenditures will be discussed in more detail in the following sections: 
* 
3.2 Sources of finance: Businesses can use various internal and external sources of 
finance for capital expenditures. 
* 
3.4 Final accounts: The value of non-current assets and the ways they are funded 
are captured on the balance sheet. 
. 
3.6 Efficiency ratio analysis: Debt/equity ratios compare how much debt is 
used with the amount of equity for capital expenditures. 
* 
3.7 Cash flow: A cash flow forecast can help managers determine how much 
capital is needed for the upcoming period. 
* 
3.8 Investment appraisal: Different investment appraisal techniques can be used 
to evaluate capital expenditures and options. 
Revenue expenditure 
Revenue expenditure is the money spent by a business to generate revenue. Revenue 
expenditure refers to the ongoing expenses for purchasing raw materials, paying 
wages, employing sales staff, and so on to generate revenue within the accounting 
period (12 months). The purchase of stock (or inventory) and paying wages and 
salaries are examples of revenue expenditures. Revenue expenditures are also called 
operating expenses and consist of any short-term expenses that are used to run the 
day-to-day business operations. Any purchases by the business that are not for capital 
items are considered revenue expenditures. 
Revenue expenditures will be explored in more depth in the following sections: 
* 
3.2 Sources of finance: Some sources of finance, such as overdrafts and trade 
credit, can be used to help pay for more short-term revenue expenditures. 
* 
3.3 Costs and revenues: Revenue expenditures can be categorized into fixed and 
variable, and direct and indirect. 
125

