Finance and accounts 
* 
3.4 Final accounts: The profit and loss account shows revenue expenditures over a 
given period of time. 
* 
3.5 Profitability and liquidity ratio analysis: Profit margins are one way for businesses 
to analyze how much of the revenue being generated is turned into profit. 
3.7 Cash flow: The timing and amount of future revenue expenditures paid in 
cash are estimated on cash flow forecasts. 
3.9 Budgets: The amounts of future revenue expenditures are set within the 
budget. 
Practice questions 
With reference to an organization of your choice, distinguish between capital 
expenditure and revenue expenditure. 
(4 marks) 
3.2 Sources of finance 
| Learningoutcomes 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* explain the following internal sources of finance: 
o personal funds (for sole traders) 
o retained profit 
o sale of assets 
* 
explain the following external sources of finance: 
share capital 
loan capital 
overdrafts 
trade credit 
crowdfunding 
leasing 
microfinance providers 
business angels 
* recommend appropriate short- or long-term sources of finance for a given 
situation. 
c o oo o O 0 0 
Whether a business is small or large, just starting up, or looking to expand, all 
businesses must pay for their expenses. The first step in choosing the right source of 
funds is to learn about the options. 
Sources of finance can be split into two main categories: internal and external. 
Internal sources of finance 
Internal sources of finance rely on funds available within and generated by the 
business. These include: 
» 
personal funds 
* retained profit 
e 
sale of assets. 
126

Personal funds 
Many entrepreneurs start their business with their own money (personal funds). 
They see a business opportunity and are so passionate about their business idea that 
they are willing to invest their own savings. This source of finance tends to be shorter 
term because most entrepreneurs have a limited amount of funds available. As an 
entrepreneur and their business become more successful, they often look to other 
external sources of finance like loan capital or investors. 
Retained profit 
Profitable businesses can choose to use their retained profit from previous periods 
for future expansion. Retained profit is the money left after all expenses including 
dividends and taxes are paid out. Exactly how this is calculated will be made clear in 
Section 3.4. Businesses that enjoy large, consistent profits can use this type of funding 
for bigger, longer-term capital expenditures, while others may have only limited 
retained profits available, if any at all. 
Sale of assets 
Businesses can sell assets. This can include selling buildings or machines that are no 
longer used. This is usually more appropriate for older, more established businesses, 
as new businesses have few assets to sell. Although finding a buyer can be challenging, 
this source of finance can be a clever way for a business to raise cash. 
Advantages and disadvantages of internal sources of finance 
The main advantage of internal sources of finance is that the business owners maintain 
full control and direction of the organization. Moreover, there are no interest payments 
or borrowing costs, and no external application or process is required. 
The main disadvantage is that these sources of finance are often limited, meaning they 
are not usually sufficient for long-term needs, expensive capital expenditures, and 
ambitious expansion plans. For organizations to pursue these goals, external sources 
of finance are often required. 
External sources of finance 
External sources of finance rely on outside organizations or individuals to help obtain 
the required funds. These include: 
* 
share capital 
* 
loan capital 
» 
overdrafts 
¢ 
trade credit 
 crowdfunding 
» 
leasing 
* 
microfinance providers 
* 
business angels. 
Share capital 
Funds acquired through the sale of shares are called share capital, also known as 
equity capital. Both privately held and publicly held companies issue shares providing 
ownership of the company to investors. As discussed in Unit 1, companies have 
shareholders, but sole traders and partnerships do not. Large amounts of money 
127

Companies can issue shares 
to raise funds from investors 
Are objective facts or 
appeals to emotion more 
effective when applying 
for an external source of 
finance? 
128 
> 
Finance and accounts 
can be raised through share capital, especially for publicly held companies, making 
it a popular choice for expensive capital expenditures and expansive growth. Share 
capital is a permanent source of finance because it does not need to be repaid. There 
are no interest payments for this source of finance, but dividends may be paid to 
shareholders and the application process for publicly held companies can be costly and 
time-consuming. The major disadvantage of share capital is that selling shares means 
dilution of control and ownership of the business. 
Loan capital 
Loan capital, also known as debt capital, is another way for businesses to obtain 
a large amount of funds. However, unlike share capital, loan capital needs to be 
repaid. Loan capital consists of borrowing funds from financial institutions (such as 
banks), and paying the loan back with interest through installment payments over 
an agreed period. The amount of interest charged can be fixed or variable depending 
on the arrangement. Making these loan payments can be difficult, but an important 
advantage is that the owners retain control of the organization when using loan 
capital. Loans can be difficult for new businesses to obtain as lenders often require 
collateral and a detailed business plan including a history or detailed forecast of reliable 
income. Without this, the lender will see the investment as too risky and either deny 
the loan or charge high interest rates. In some areas, governments offer loans to small 
businesses to grow the economy. 
Overdrafts 
In addition to loan capital, financial institutions can provide overdrafts to any type 
of business (and individuals). These are a form of short-term finance to cover any cash 
deficits up to an agreed amount. Banks often charge high interest rates for overdrafts, 
making this a costly option and not suitable for long-term or large expenditures. 
However, the flexibility and convenience of overdrafts can help businesses meet their 
day-to-day financial obligations.

Trade credit 
Trade credit is an important short-term finance option available to all businesses. 
Rather than paying for goods and/or services immediately with cash, businesses often 
purchase on credit, negotiating the terms of payment. Discounts can be offered for 
quicker payment, but businesses usually agree to make a payment within 30, 45, 60, 
or even 90 days. Although this is not a way for a business to bring in money, the extra 
time gained from using trade credit can allow businesses to sell their products before 
they have to pay for the raw materials. However, any delay in paying back creditors 
as agreed will put the good relationships between the business and its trade creditors 
(often suppliers of materials) at risk. 
Crowdfunding 
Crowdfunding (short- to medium-term) is a relatively new way of raising finance. 
Crowdfunding usually relies on websites and social media to attract a large number 
of people to each contribute a small amount of money. Recently, some countries 
have allowed companies to participate in equity or regulation crowdfunding, where 
investors receive percentage ownership in the company based on the amount of their 
investment. Other types of crowdfunding are more suitable for small and medium- 
sized enterprises and include: 
« 
donation-based, where investors donate to social enterprises that share their own 
interests 
» 
rewards-based, where investors contribute funds with the expectation of being 
one of the first customers to receive a new product 
* 
profit or revenue-sharing, where investors contribute funds in exchange for a 
share of future profits or revenue 
* 
debt or peer-to-peer crowdfunding, where investors contribute funds in exchange 
for repayment at a later date with interest. 
Although some organizations have raised millions using crowdfunding, and some 
analysts project future growth and evolution, this source of finance was originally 
intended for business start-ups and entrepreneurs. 
Leasing 
Rather than purchasing an asset (such as a building or machinery), businesses can use 
leasing as a source of finance. Leasing means the business (lessee) will never own the 
asset, but will make payments to the the asset owner (lessor) over an agreed period of 
time in order to use the asset. The lessor remains the owner throughout the duration 
of the lease and regains full use of the asset when the agreement ends. Some leases can 
be packaged with other services, like maintenance. One major disadvantage of leasing 
rather than buying is that the asset is not recorded as a fixed asset on the balance sheet. 
This means the business cannot use it as collateral for other sources of finance like loan 
capital. Leasing is not a way to bring in money. However, if 
a business plans to use the 
asset for a short period of time, leasing can save the organization money. 
Microfinance providers 
As with crowdfunding, microfinance providers contribute small amounts of 
capital for small businesses and entrepreneurs. Microfinance providers operate much 
like a bank and focus on providing initial capital to help entrepreneurs who might 
otherwise not be able to get any finance (such as organizations or entrepreneurs that 
Online resources 
Indiegogo and Kickstarter 
are two of the more popular 
crowdfunding websites for 
businesses, 

Online resources 
To learn more about the 
Grameen Foundation, visit 
the link below. 
O %0 
4F 
Businesses often need to P 
combine several sources of 
finance 
130 
Finance and accounts 
lack collateral). Professor Muhammad Yunus is largely credited for inventing this idea 
to help people escape poverty and empower women. In 2006, Yunus and Grameen 
Bank were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their work. Microfinance providers often 
operate in developing countries, and many provide basic financial literacy to help the 
entrepreneur succeed. 
Business angels 
Business angels target small and medium-sized enterprises. Business angels are 
wealthy groups or individuals who wish to invest in a profitable privately-owned 
business in exchange for partial ownership. Angel investors often focus on start-ups 
or businesses in the early stages of high growth. In contrast to loans, businesses do 
not have to make monthly repayments or interest payments under this arrangement. 
Instead, the angel investor receives partial ownership in the business in exchange for 
funding. This does mean some dilution of control and ownership. However, many 
business angels also offer their business skills and expertise to start-ups that do not 
have as much experience. 
The most appropriate source of finance 
Determining the most appropriate source of finance for a given situation can 
be challenging. There is no single, correct answer, and the best solution is often 
to combine several sources of finance. That way, businesses can minimize the 
disadvantages and maximize the advantages of each source of finance. There are a 
variety of factors to consider when choosing sources of finance. 
49 qakpdpa19 
FPEERE 
4 - 
Type and size of the business 
Some funding options are appropriate for certain types of organization and 
inappropriate for others. For example, personal funds and microfinance providers 
are only appropriate for sole traders and partnerships. Similarly, share capital is only 
appropriate for privately and publicly held companies. In addition, business angels 
favor smaller businesses and are not appropriate for publicly held companies.

Table 3.1 Sources of finance by type of organization 
Privately held | Publicly held 
Sole traders | Partnerships 
companies 
companies 
Personal funds 
v 
v 
Share capital 
v 
v 
Micrf)ﬁnance 
7 
Y 
providers 
Business angels 
v 
v 
v 
Other finance options can be suitable for any type of business. However, larger, more 
established organizations usually find it easier to secure sources of finance like loan 
capital due to the large number of resources and assets available to them. Smaller 
organizations have fewer assets to offer as collateral and usually cannot provide the 
same level of security to investors and lenders. 
The sources of finance used by social enterprises and non-profit organizations can also 
vary. For example, charities rely purely on grants, donations, and endowment. Other 
social enterprises, especially for-profit social enterprises, may utilize many of the 
sources of finances discussed above. 
Type and amount of expenditure 
Expenditures can range from basic raw materials needed for production in the short 
term (smaller, revenue expenditures) to larger, capital expenditures needed in the long 
term like machinery or an office building. Figure 3.1 shows the external sources of 
finance that are suitable for different types of expenditures. 
¥ 
~ 
o 
) 
&' 
~ 
é’b 
b‘*”? 
t’? 
& 
G 
& 
S 
& 
& 
& 
& 
& @ 
f ¥ o 
§ 
s 
F 
o 
& 
o 
s 
¥ 
Z?)@’ 
F 
~ 
; 
Cl 
IS 
s 8§ &S 
&£ 5 s FF 3 
& 
& 
S 
N 
R 
A 
4 
¥ 
5 
& 
) 
oS 
O & & 
& 9 ¥ 
9@ 
S 9 
& 
N 
S 
Smaller, short-term 
Larger, long-term 
revenue expenditures 
capital expenditures 
Other considerations include the following: 
* The amount of risk involved: Short-term finance is usually less risky for lenders 
and easier to obtain. Long-term finance takes longer to pay back and is generally 
riskier for lenders. Therefore, some organizations, especially smaller ones with 
fewer assets to offer as collateral, will have more difficulty securing this type of 
funding. 
* How quickly the funds are needed: Some businesses may need to acquire funds 
quickly to survive, while their other needs are less immediate. Personal savings 
and internal sources of finance are usually the quickest, whereas external sources 
of finance like share capital can take time to set up and acquire. 
<4 Figure 3.1 
Short- and long- 
term sources of finance 
131

