IB learner profile 
Inquirers 
Research the sources of finance 
available for a local business. 
132 
Finance and accounts 
Every source of finance has some cost to it. The most obvious example is the amount 
of interest charged when securing a loan. However, even donation crowdfunding has a 
cost in the amount of time and effort required to set it up and attract investors. 
Activity 
Discuss appropriate sources of finance for the following business opportunities. 
1 A social entrepreneur wants to start an online tutoring business. The school 
year is about to begin, and the entrepreneur will need to purchase computer 
equipment, software, and peripherals. 
2 Alarge, multinational company is nearing capacity and wants to open an 
additional production facility overseas. 
3 Aprofitable food delivery service is looking to purchase a fleet of electric bikes 
to improve efficiency for its local customers. Currently, it uses two small vans. 
4 A privately-owned company operates several parking garages across the 
country. The company is considering installing solar canopies over the parking 
spaces. It will be expensive to install these solar canopies, but they could 
generate significant revenue in the future. The company would be able to sell 
the power generated by the solar canopies to local energy companies and charge 
higher prices for covered parking spaces. 
Practice questions 
With reference to an organization of your choice, distinguish between share capital 
and loan capital. 
(4 marks) 
3.3 Costs and revenues 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
define, identify, distinguish, and explain the following types of costs: 
o fixed 
o variable 
o direct 
o indirect/overhead 
¢ 
define, identify, and explain total revenue and revenue streams, using examples. 
Now we turn our attention to the costs and revenues of a business. Developing a clear 
understanding of these quantitative measures helps managers to plan and control the 
direction of the business, and helps in decision-making. In addition, information about 
the costs and revenues of a business is needed to calculate profit and prepare final 
accounts, which will be covered in the next section. 
Fixed and variable costs 
The first way businesses classify costs is whether they change or do not change in 
relation to the level of output (the number of units produced).

Fixed costs do not change in the short term. These costs stay the same regardless of 
any change in the level of production, output, or sales during the relevant period. They 
remain the same whether a business makes or sells one item or 1,000 items. Most costs 
change (in the long term) depending on the level of output. For example, if a business 
continues to increase their sales, then additional equipment and/or employees will 
be needed. Some examples of fixed costs include rent, equipment leases, marketing/ 
advertising, administrative expenses, loan/interest payments, business licenses, 
insurance, and salaries. Fixed costs are shown in Figure 3.2. 
< Figure3.2 
Ffixed costs 
Costs 
Fixed costs 
Level of output 
(or quantity sold) 
< Rentona manufacturing 
facility is an example of a 
fixed cost 
Software companies like 
Microsoft usually have 
higher fixed costs versus 
variable costs, as their costs 
do not change much when 
the level of sales changes. 
In contrast, a retail firm like 
Aldi has high variable costs 
versus fixed costs due to 
the high cost of sales. 
What does this mean? 
Any short-term downturns 
in revenue would affect 
organizations like Microsoft 
more, as they would still 
need to pay their high fixed 
costs. It also means that 
software companies have 
the potential for higher 
profits in times of economic 
growth, as increased sales 
would not necessarily mean 
a large increase in costs. 
Variable costs vary in direct proportion to the change in output/level of production 
or sales during the relevant period. The raw materials needed to make a product are 
an example of a variable cost. The amount of raw materials needed depends on how 
many units a business produces. For example, if a furniture maker increases their 
This type of cost analysis was 
very important for many 
organizations during the 
of variable costs include utilities, transportation, materials, delivery, and royalties. 
COVID-19 panderic. As 
Figure 3.3 shows variable costs. 
the economy slowed during 
lockdawns, arganizations 
with high fixed costs suffered 
greatly. 
production, then more material like wood will need to be purchased. Other examples 
133

Figure3.3 \ariable costs 
Transportation is an example 
of 
a variable cost 
Figure 3.4 The total costs 
line does not start at the 
origin because of the 
fixed costs 
134 
> 
B 
Finance and accounts 
Variable costs 
Costs 
Level of output 
(or quantity sold) 
Typically, the salaries of full-time staff are fixed costs, as this expense cannot be 
identified directly with the production levels or sales of a business. However, salary 
can be based on commissions or performance-related pay, so could be seen as semi- 
variable. Employees working on the production line, especially those paid an hourly or 
per unit wage, are typically considered variable costs. 
Fixed and variable costs can be combined to indicate total costs when applying break-even 
analysis. This is shown in Figure 3.4 and will be explained in more detail in Unit 5. 
Total costs 
Costs 
Fixed costs 
- 
- 
s 
'_p"‘ 
Variable costs 
Level of output 
(or quantity sold) 
Direct and indirect costs 
Another way businesses can classify costs is in terms of how they relate to the goods or 
services being produced and sold. 
Direct costs directly relate to the production of goods and can be traced to a specific 
cost object, which may be a product, a service, or a department. Some examples include 
packaging and raw materials. These costs are included in gross profit calculations.

Many direct costs are variable costs, but this is not always the case. Some fixed costs 
such as rent being paid for a production facility are considered a direct cost. 
Indirect or overhead costs cannot be linked directly to a specific product, service, 
or department. Some examples include management salaries and rent paid for multi- 
purpose facilities. These costs are excluded from gross profit calculations but included 
in net profit calculations. Many indirect costs are fixed costs, but not all. For example, 
utilities (such as gas, electricity, and water) are variable costs as they change depending 
on the level of output. They are considered indirect costs as they cannot usually be 
directly linked to specific goods or services. 
1 Are the following fixed or variable costs? 
a. Lease payments 
e. Administrative salaries 
b. Packaging 
for managers 
c. Raw materials 
f. Workers’ hourly wages 
d. Insurance 
2 Are the following direct or indirect costs? 
a. Packaging 
d. Rent for general office 
b. Raw materials 
e. Utilities 
c. Royalties 
Revenue 
Money going out of 
a business is considered costs or expenses, whereas money 
coming into the business from sales is considered revenue. There are many different 
terms used to describe revenue (including sales, sales revenue, and sales turnover). All 
these terms represent income being generated by the main operations of a business 
from the sale of goods or services. 
Revenue can be earned through cash or credit transactions and is recorded on the date 
the item was sold. Revenue is shown as the top item in a profit and loss statement from 
which all costs and expenses are subtracted to arrive at gross and net profit. 
A simple formula used to describe revenue is: 
Revenue = price X quantity sold 
For example, if a chocolate shop sells 50 bars of chocolate for £3.00 each, then the 
revenue earned from those sales will be £150 (£3.00 X 50). 
Revenue is shown in Figure 3.5 and will be explained in more detail in Unit 5. 
Comparing Figure 3.5 to Figure 3.4 yields some key observations: 
* The total revenue graph starts from the origin (at zero), because if the business 
does not sell any items, then there will be no revenue. The total cost graph does 
not start from the origin because of fixed costs. 
* The gradient (slope or steepness) of the total revenue line is determined by the price. A 
business needs to make sure that the average price of its products exceeds the variable 
cost per unit in order to make a profit. Profit is the total revenue minus total costs. 
135

