152 
Finance and accounts 
Toolkit connection 
Contribution costing is a quantitative technique used to calculate how many units 
have to be produced and sold in order to cover all costs (both direct and indirect). 
Contribution costing assumes that each product will contribute to covering indirect 
costs (overheads) but does not apportion the indirect costs between different 
products. It is a useful technique when the business must decide which products 
should be continued, which should be removed from production, or whether to 
accept a new production contract for a product or component depending on the 
‘contribution’ of the contract towards indirect costs. 
Contribution measures how much is being contributed towards the indirect costs. 
Total contribution = Sales revenue — Direct costs 
When the total contribution exceeds indirect costs, a profit is made. When the total 
contribution is lower than the indirect costs, a loss is incurred. 
3.5 Profitability and liquidity ratio analysis 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
» 
calculate and analyze the following profitability ratios: 
o gross profit margin 
o profit margin 
o return on capital employed (ROCE) 
» 
calculate and analyze the following liquidity ratios: 
o current ratio 
o acid test (quick) ratio 
» recommend possible strategies to improve these ratios. 
Ratio analysis is a useful quantitative tool when evaluating the financial success of a 
business. Consider the performance of two bookstores: Tiny Bookstore operates in a 
small village in Vietnam, while Giant Bookstore has several stores located throughout 
Asia and operates online. Their financial performances during the most recent year are 
summarized in Table 3.2. The amounts are in millions of Vietnam Dong (VND). 
Table 3.2 Profit and loss accounts for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore 
Tiny Bookstore | Giant Bookstore 
Sales revenue 
1 000 
20000 
Cost of goods sold 
500 
8 000 
Gross profit 
500 
12000 
Expenses 
250 
10000 
Net profit before interest and tax 
250 
2000 

Comparing the two companies’ gross profits suggests that Giant Bookstore is much 
more profitable, as its gross and net profits are much higher than Tiny Bookstore. 
However, is this a fair comparison? Imagine you are an investor interested in investing 
in a bookstore that is best able to turn their revenue into profit. Which bookstore 
would you choose? As the owner of Tiny Bookstore, how could you evaluate your 
store’s performance? This is where ratio analysis can help. 
! ; 
N 
In this section, we will explore different ways to analyze the financial performance 
and stability of a business using ratio analysis. These ratios will help us to compare 
the profitability and liquidity of 
a business to those of other businesses in the same 
industry, and to analyze trends over time. 
Profitability 
Profit is a way to measure the financial performance of an organization. It can be 
measured in different ways (such as gross profit and net profit) by subtracting 
expenses from income. These amounts are shown in the profit and loss account. 
Profitability ratios attempt to measure the performance of a business by calculating 
the degree to which a business achieves financial gain from its sales. These ratios can 
be calculated in terms of gross profit margin (GPM) and net profit margin (NPM). 
Both are expressed as a percentage and are given by the following formulae: 
ross profit 
Gross profit margin = BrosSPIO™ o 100 
sales revenue 
profit before interest and tax %100 
Profit margin = 
sales revenue 
Note that the term ‘profit margin’ in the second equation refers to net profit margin. 
All organizations strive for as high a gross or net profit margin as possible, as these 
ratios indicate how much of the revenue is turned into profit. Let’s revisit Tiny 
Bookstore and Giant Bookstore. Rather than just calculating the gross profit amounts, 
we can also calculate the GPMs (Table 3.3). 
153

154 
Finance and accounts 
Table 3.3 Profit and loss accounts for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore 
with gross profit margins 
Tiny Bookstore 
Giant Bookstore 
Sales revenue 
1 000 
20000 
Cost of goods sold 
500 
8 000 
Gross profit 
500 
12000 
Gross profit margin 
200 * 100 = 50% 12 000 x 100 = 60% 
1000 
20 000 
The gross profit margins show that Giant Bookstore has achieved a higher margin. 
This may be due to its size and ability to minimize its cost of goods sold by leveraging 
economies of scale through bulk purchases. Another explanation is that Giant 
Bookstore may be able to charge higher prices. However, it should be noted that the 
gross profit margins are much closer than the gross profit amounts. To investigate 
profitability further, we can now calculate the NPMs (Table 3.4). 
Table 3.4 Profit and loss accounts for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore 
with gross and net profit margins 
Tiny Bookstore 
Giant Bookstore 
Sales revenue 
1000 
20000 
Cost of goods sold 
500 
8000 
Gross profit 
500 
12000 
Expenses 
250 
10000 
Net profit before interest and tax 
250 
2000 
Gross profit margin 
200, 100 = 50% | 229995 100 = 60% 
1000 
20 000 
Net profit margin 
250 100 = 25% | 29299 
100 = 10% 
1000 
20 000 
Looking at the NPMs leads to a different conclusion. Tiny Bookstore has a higher 
net profit margin of 25 per cent, whereas Giant Bookstore has a net profit margin of 
10 per cent. This indicates that Tiny Bookstore can generate more profit from its sales 
than Giant Bookstore. More specifically, for every 100 VND in sales, Tiny Bookstore 
earns 25 VND in net profit, whereas Giant Bookstore earns 10 VND in net profit. 
One explanation for this is that Tiny Bookstore can control its indirect expenses or 
overheads better. 
When calculating and analyzing profit margins, note the following: 
* Both gross and net profit margins are expressed as a percentage. 
* The formulae for both profit margins (and all ratios) will be provided in the 
examination. 
* The calculation of gross and net profit margins requires relevant information 
from the profit and loss account (statement of profit or loss). 
* The higher the profit margin, the better.

* 
Ratio analysis is an effective way of comparing the profitability of two or more 
organizations within the same industry, regardless of their size. 
» 
Asingle profitamount or ratio is not very helpful. Consider all gross and net profit 
amounts and ratios when evaluating the profitability of an organization. 
*  When looking at the profit margins of a single organization, look at several years 
of data. That way, trends can be analyzed. For example, are profit margins going 
up or down? 
» 
Comparing NPMs to GPMs reveals how well a business is managing its indirect 
costs or overheads. A large difference between the net and gross profit margins 
can indicate poor management of these indirect costs. This is especially relevant 
for managers to help them make decisions. 
* 
Ingeneral, NPM is considered a better measure of profitability than GPM as it 
considers cost of goods sold and expenses. 
* 
Profit margins can vary by industry. For example, we would expect lower 
production costs in service industries. This means that organizations operating 
within the service industries have higher gross profit margins than organizations 
involved in producing and selling physical products. Organizations that sell 
massive quantities can operate successfully with lower margins, as the higher 
volume of sales can compensate for lower margins. Organizations that sell fewer 
units (such as luxury items) often require higher margins to succeed. 
Another ratio that can be used to analyze an organization’s profitability is the return 
on capital employed (ROCE). This ratio also starts with the net profit before interest 
and tax, but instead of expressing this as a percentage of sales revenue as for the NPM, 
the ROCE expresses the net profit as a percentage of capital employed. It uses the 
following formula: 
profit before interest and tax 
Return on capital employed (ROCE) = 
X 100 
capital employed 
where capital employed = non-current liabilities + equity 
Non-current liabilities and equity (capital employed) come from the balance sheet. 
Non-current liabilities include any long-term borrowings held for more than one year. 
Equity consists of share capital and retained earnings. Therefore, capital employed 
includes all shareholders’ funds and long-term sources of finance. 
Expressing profit as a percentage of capital employed can provide investors and owners 
with insight into how much profit is being generated from their capital investments. 
Since traditional investments like stocks and real estate historically yield a 10 per cent 
return, investors are likely to look for businesses that have a ROCE above this. The level 
of risk involved also needs to be assessed. Any ROCE lower than the interest rates offered 
by banks (a low-risk investment) will be avoided by investors. 
When calculating and analyzing the ROCE ratio, note the following: 
* 
Just like profit margins, the higher the ROCE, the better. 
» ROCE requires information from the profit and loss account, and the balance sheet. 
* ROCE can be used to analyze a firm’s efficiency in terms of how the capital 
employed is being used and whether managers are making effective decisions. 
Online resource 
1BISWorld provides 
worldwide industry reports. 
[=] 
A =] 
E.'l.'l‘ 
185

Finance and accounts 
» ROCE is considered a prime or key ratio, as many investors and analysts start 
with this ratio when analyzing the profitability and efficiency of 
a business before 
calculating any additional ratios. 
» 
 While comparing the ROCE of an organization to competitors and interest rates 
at banks is helpful, analysts and investors are also interested in identifying ROCE 
trends over multiple periods of time. One way to do this is to use simple linear 
regression. 
Simple linear regression 
Simple linear regression can be used to analyze the ROCE of a business over different 
periods of time. For example, look at Figure 3.10, which compares the ROCEs of 
Company A and Company B over ten years. 
Figure3.10 ROCEof P 
Company A and Company B. 
The R? value or coefficient of 
e Company A = 
Trendline for Company 
A R? = 0.916 
e Company B 
== Trendline for Company B RZ = 0.001 
o, 
determination indicates the 
20% 
Py 
level of variation in the data in 
comparison to the trendline. 
15% 
R? values close to 1 indicate 
b 
P 
" 
there is little variation, while R? 
w 
Ps 
indi 
o 10% 
values close to 0 indicate large 
) 
= 
e — 
variation 
____‘———-'—‘_ 
[ 
i 
5% 
y 
L 
0% 
° 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Year 
Although Company B has earned a higher ROCE on average, some investors would 
look to minimize risk and look for steady growth and choose Company A. Other 
investors would be fine with some volatility in exchange for more growth potential and 
would invest in Company B. 
Improving profitability ratios 
It is important to understand how profitability ratios can be improved. 
Strategically changing prices to increase profits: For example, the prices of 
inelastic products can be increased, while the prices of elastic products can be 
decreased. (Price elasticity of demand is covered in more detail in Unit 4.) However, the 
business needs to be careful with its pricing strategy and ensure that its prices are still 
competitive so that it does not lose sales. 
Finding cheaper suppliers or renegotiating the terms of payment: This can help 
reduce the cost of goods sold and thereby increase gross profit. However, the quality 
of materials might suffer when cheaper suppliers are used, and longer payment terms 
might jeopardize the survival of suppliers or a long-term relationship with them. 
Increasing or implementing effective promotional strategies: The promotional 
strategy must increase sales enough to cover the increase in promotional expenses. It is 
often difficult to measure the effectiveness of promotional strategies. 
156

Reducing labor costs or making labor more productive: In theory, this decreases 
production costs and thereby increases profits. However, this needs to be done 
carefully, as existing employees may become demotivated. 
Although this would not affect the GPM, cutting or reducing unnecessary indirect 
costs would improve the NPM and ROCE. This could include reducing salaries of 
managers or benefits, which needs to be done carefully. Another example is finding 
premises with a lower rent or negotiating a cheaper rent. 
While decreasing the capital employed will, in theory, increase ROCE, this is not 
a recommended approach unless it means reducing non-current liabilities. This 
means that net profit would need to be maintained, which might be difficult with the 
reduction in long-term loans used to purchase fixed assets like machinery. 
Increasing dividend would decrease retained earnings: This would decrease capital 
employed, and as a result, increase the ROCE. However, this means that the business 
will be left with lower retained earnings as a source of long-term funds for its activities. 
Practice questions 
The Pie Store (TPS) bakes pies and sells them in its three retail stores. In the current 
year, each store made a profit. 
Financial information for TPS’ three stores (all amounts in $) 
Store 1 
Store 2 
Store 3 
Sales revenue 
180000 
223000 
170000 
Cost of sales 
90 000 
120 000 
85000 
Gross profit 
90 000 
103 000 
85000 
Expenses 
66 000 
76 000 
67 000 
Net profit before interest and tax 
q Price discounts can increase 
sales 
157

158 
Finance and accounts 
At the end of the year, the balance sheet for TPS (three stores combined) showed 
$200,000 in assets and $120,000 in liabilities, $50,000 of which was long-term debt. 
1 Calculate which store: 
a. made the highest net profit before interest and tax 
(1 mark) 
b. had the highest profitability. 
(2 marks) 
2 Calculate: 
a. TPS’ equity 
(1 mark) 
b. TPS’ return on capital employed (ROCE). 
(2 marks) 
3 Explain one effect that the $50,000 long-term debt may 
have on TPS' profit and loss account. 
(2 marks) 
Liquidity 
The NPM, GPM, and ROCE ratios provide a way of analyzing the profitability of 
a business. Here, we will look at two additional ratios, which focus on liquidity. 
Liquidity ratios are used to analyze the financial stability of a business and its ability to 
meet any short-term debt obligations. 
We will explore two liquidity ratios: 
e 
current ratio 
* 
acid test (quick) ratio. 
Current ratio 
The formula for the current ratio is: 
current assets 
Currentratio = 
— 
current liabilities 
The current ratio compares current assets and current liabilities, which both come 
from the balance sheet. These were explained in the previous section. 
* Current assets are items owned by the business that will be used up or converted 
into cash within a year. Examples include cash, debtors (accounts receivable), and 
stock (inventory). 
* Current liabilities are all the debts or other payables due within one year. 
Examples include bank overdrafts, creditors, and other short-term loans. 
The balance sheet of ABC Ltd in Figure 3.8 shows current assets totaling $1,100m and 
current liabilities totaling $500m. This means the current ratio for ABC Ltd is 2.2. 
currentassets  $1100m 
. 
=27 
current liabilities 
$500m 
Currentratio = 
As with profitability ratios, a single current ratio does not provide much information 
and recommended values can vary depending on the industry. It is better to have the 
ratios of multiple time periods or other competitors to compare. 
However, it is important to be able to explain what the current ratio is showing. A 
current ratio of 2.2 states that for every $1 of short-term debt (current liabilities), the 
business has $2.20 in current assets to pay off these debts. Having more current assets 
than current liabilities is a good thing, but can there be too much of a good thing? 
Table 3.5 shows recommended levels for the current ratio.

Table 3.5 Recommended levels for the current ratio 
Current ratio 
Explanation 
Below 1.5 
For most businesses, a current ratio below 1.5 is too low and 
indicates potential liquidity problems. A business may have 
trouble meeting its day-to-day expenses. 
1.5-2.0 
This is the recommended range for most businesses and indicates 
a healthy liquidity position. 
Above 2.0 
A current ratio above 2.0 is considered too high, although this is 
not usually as big of 
a problem as being too low. This might be an 
indicator that a business has too many assets tied up in cash or 
other current assets, and it should look to use these current assets 
to invest in additional fixed assets to grow the business. 
Acid test (quick) ratio 
The acid test ratio (or quick ratio) is given by the following formula: 
currentassets — stock 
Acid test (quick) ratio = 
g 
current liabilities 
The key difference between the two liquidity ratios is that the acid test ratio removes 
stock (inventory) from current assets before dividing it by current liabilities. This is 
because not all organizations can rely on converting their stock into liquid cash to 
pay off their daily expenses. Therefore, the acid test ratio can be used by organizations 
wanting to take a more conservative approach. 
Revisiting the ABC Ltd example produces the following for the acid test ratio: 
current assets — stock  $1100m — $100m 
- 
=20 
current liabilities 
$500m 
Acid test (quick) ratio = 
Table 3.6 shows recommended levels for the acid test ratio. ABC Ltd has an acid test 
ratio of 2.0, which may be too high. However, this can vary depending on the industry. 
For example, if ABC Ltd is involved in the technology sector, a higher liquidity ratio 
may be advised so that the business has enough cash on hand to adapt to rapid changes 
in the industry. 
Table 3.6 Recommended levels for the acid test (quick) ratio 
Acid test 
(quick) ratio 
Explanation 
Below 1.0 
For most businesses, an acid test ratio below 1.0 is too low and 
indicates potential liquidity problems. A business may have 
trouble meeting its day-to-day expenses. 
1.0-1.5 
This is the recommended range for most businesses and indicates 
a healthy liquidity position. 
Above 1.5 
An acid test ratio above 1.5 is considered too high , although this 
is not usually as big of a problem as being too low. This might 
be an indicator that a business has too much of its assets tied up 
in cash, and it should look to use some of its cash to invest in 
additional fixed assets to grow the business. 
The term ‘acid test’ 
originated from the 1800s 
gold rush. Nitric acid was 
used to identify real gold, 
as the acid dissolves any 
metal that is not gold. 
The phrase has come to 
mean a test that produces 
indisputable results. 
159

What roles do reasan 
and emotion play when 
analyzing financial 
performance? 
Are the results of some 
types of ratio analysis less 
open to interpretation 
than others? 
IB learner profile 
Inquirers 
Calculate and analyze the 
profitability and liquidity ratios 
of a local business. 
160 
Finance and accounts 
When calculating and analyzing liquidity ratios, note the following: 
» Both liquidity ratios require information from the balance sheet only. 
* Both liquidity ratios are expressed as a number and not a percentage. They 
can also be expressed as a ratio. For example, a current ratio of 2 can be 
expressed as 2: 1. 
* Lenders and creditors are two stakeholders interested in liquidity ratios. Before 
lending money or providing supplies, they will want to make sure the business 
has enough cash (and current assets) available to meet its short-term debt 
obligations and make payments. 
» When looking at liquidity ratios of a single organization, look at several years of 
data. That way, trends can be analyzed. For example, are the liquidity ratios going 
up or down? 
* 
Like profitability ratios, liquidity ratios can vary by industry. For example, 
organizations operating in the technology or consumer discretionary (for 
example, automobile) industry would most likely have higher liquidity ratios to 
respond to changes in the market. Organizations operating in consumer staple 
and healthcare industries would most likely have lower liquidity ratios, as they 
can rely on regular purchases. 
. 
Efficiency ratios (which we will look at in the next section) can help to 
determine which liquidity ratio to use. Specifically, the stock turnover ratio can be 
used to assess a company’s ability to turn stock into cash. 
*  When in doubt, it is probably best to use the more conservative acid test ratio, as 
stock is usually the least liquid current asset. 
Improving liquidity ratios 
Liquidity ratios can be too low. Some strategies to address liquidity ratios that are too 
low include the following: 
* Reduce overdrafts and use more long-term debt to finance business activity. This 
will reduce current liabilities and improve liquidity ratios. Taking on long-term 
debt is not always the best solution as interest still needs to be paid. 
 Organizations can sell fixed assets and convert these into cash (current assets). 
This will increase liquidity ratios. Some organizations may not have any fixed 
assets to sell, as they are being used and are necessary for operations. One option 
would be to lease rather than own certain fixed assets, but leasing fixed assets 
will increase long-term payments, and the business cannot use the fixed asset as 
collateral when seeking long-term loans. 
» To increase the acid test ratio, organizations can sell stock at a discount or offer 
extended credit period to debtors. This will reduce stock and increase other 
current assets like cash and debtors, thereby improving the acid test ratio. 
However, extending the credit period to debtors might cause the business to 
experience difficulties in paying its suppliers (creditors). 
Liquidity ratios can also be too high, although this is less of a problem. Businesses can 
decrease liquidity ratios by purchasing more fixed assets. If purchased using cash, this 
will decrease current assets and lower liquidity ratios. If purchased using short-term 
credit, this will increase current liabilities and lower liquidity ratios.

Limitations of ratio analysis 
Many of the limitations of final accounts also apply to these financial ratios, as they also 
rely on information from the final accounts. These limitations include the following: 
» 
Financial statements and ratios provide quantitative data. Although this is 
important, many of today’s organizations take a more holistic approach when 
evaluating their performance and position (such as the triple bottom line 
approach of people, planet, and profit). 
* 
Profitability ratios are not applicable to non-profit organizations, as they generate 
surpluses instead of profits, and their focus is on achieving social objectives. 
* 
Businesses use additional ratios and variations of these ratios when reporting on 
and analyzing performance. 
* 
These ratios are probably most reliable for publicly held companies as they need 
to publish their final accounts according to established accounting principles. 
« 
Comparative data from competitors andor multiple time periods may not be 
available. Single ratio calculations without any context are less helpful. 
* 
Financial ratios are based on historical financial statements and therefore provide 
historical information. Businesses operate in a dynamic environment, which is 
constantly changing. 
Practice questions 
Papel manufactures and sells paper bags. It pays cash for 80 per cent of its raw 
materials but, to remain competitive, it must sell on credit to all customers. Many 
debtors are not paying on time and creditors (suppliers) are increasing. The board of 
directors is concerned about Papel’s liquidity position. 
The finance manager has provided information from Papel’s accounts. 
Selected information from Papel’s accounts at 31 December 2022 
000s ($) 
Retained earnings 
14 
Cash 
3 
Cost of sales 
2 
Trade creditors 
20 
Debtors 
12 
Expenses 
2 
Borrowings —long term 
20 
Non-current assets 
60 
Sales revenue 
5 
Share capital 
26 
Stock 
5 
1 Define the term ‘debtors’. 
(2 marks) 
2 Using information from the table: 
a. construct a fully labeled balance sheet for Papel for the end of 
December 2022 
(5 marks) 
b. calculate the current ratio for Papel for the end of December 2022. 
(1 mark) 
3 Explain one possible strategy, other than elimination of credit sales, 
for Papel to improve its liquidity position. 
(2 marks) 
161

