162 
Finance and accounts 
3.6 Efficiency ratio analysis 
o 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
calculate and analyze the following efficiency ratios: 
o stock turnover 
o debtor days 
o creditor days 
o gearing ratio 
» recommend possible strategies to improve these ratios 
* 
distinguish between insolvency and bankruptcy. 
In the previous section, we learned how ratios can be used to analyze the profitability 
and liquidity of a business. We will now explore additional financial ratios to assess 
the efficiency of a business. Efficiency ratios are used to assess the effectiveness of the 
directors and their management of current assets and current liabilities. These include: 
* 
stock turnover 
* debtor days 
* 
creditor days. 
We will then learn about the gearing ratio and how this can be used to assess the 
financial structure of a business. Finally, we will investigate the difference between 
insolvency and bankruptcy. 
Again, we will look at Giant Bookstore and Tiny Bookstore. Relevant line items from 
their final accounts are shown in Table 3.7 and Table 3.8 (amounts are in millions of 
Vietnam Dong). 
Table 3.7 Profit and loss account for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore 
Tiny Bookstore 
Giant Bookstore 
Sales revenue 
1000 
20000 
Cost of goods sold 
(500) 
8000 
Gross profit 
500 
12000 
Expenses 
250 
10 000 
Net profit before interest and tax 
250 
2000 
Table 3.8 Balance sheet information for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore 
Tiny Bookstore 
Giant Bookstore 
Stock 
150 
1100 
Debtors 
250 
4000 
Creditors 
100 
2000 
Non-current liabilities 
750 
5000 
Share capital 
300 
15000 
Retained earnings 
200 
5000 

Stock turnover 
First, we will focus on stock. Stock (or inventory) is the value of all the raw materials, 
unfinished goods, and finished goods in the possession of the business. Stock is a 
current asset that is included on the balance sheet. Looking at this amount provides a 
little insight into the business. 
Although the management of stock and stock control will be covered in more detail in 
Unit 5, the following stock turnover ratios can help managers assess and manage this 
important part of the business. 
" A bookstore’s stock is its 
books and any other items 
it sells 
There are two formulae for stock turnover. The first provides the average number 
of times the stock is sold and replenished over a given year. The second provides the 
average number of days between the purchase and sale of stock over a given year. 
: 
costof sales 
Stock turnover (number of times) = ———>~— 
average stock 
averagestock 
Stock turnover (numberof days) = ety et PRI 
costof sales 
openingstock + closingstock 
whereaverage stock = 
5 
As discussed earlier in this unit, the cost of sales (or cost of goods sold) is the money 
spent on raw materials, manufacturing, and/or acquiring the goods it sells. This is 
found in the profit and loss account. 
The average stock value is calculated using the opening stock and closing stock values 
in order to determine the stock turnover. The balance sheet information in Table 3.8 
provides the stock value at a certain date (closing stock). The opening stock value can 
be found from the previous year’s balance sheet. This is because the opening stock is 
the same as the previous year’s closing stock (or stock shown on the previous year's 
balance sheet). 
163

164 
Finance and accounts 
Tiny Bookstore had an opening stock value of 100 million VND, and Giant Bookstore 
had an opening stock value of 900 million VND. Using the stock amounts from 
Table 3.8 for the closing stock, we can calculate the average stock values for Tiny 
Bookstore and Giant Bookstore as follows: 
Tiny Bookstore: 
Giant Bookstore: 
150 + 100 
1100 + 900 
= 125 million VND 
= 1000 million VND 
The stock turnover can now be calculated for both bookstores, as in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9 Stock turnover for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore 
Stock turnover (number of times) 
~ cost of sales 
average stock 
Stock turnover (number of days) 
_ average stock 365 
cost of sales 
Tiny 
2110 —— 
125 . 365 = 91.25 days 
Bookstore 
125 
500 
Giant 
8000 _ ¢ imes 
1000 365 — 45.625 days 
Bookstore 
1000 
8000 
These ratios indicate that Giant Bookstore has a better stock turnover ratio than Tiny 
Bookstore. Giant Bookstore has sold and replenished the value of its entire stock about 
eight times over the year, whereas Tiny Bookstore did this only four times. Similarly, 
Giant Bookstore sold and replenished the value of its entire stock about every 45 days 
(or exactly 45.625 days) during the past year, whereas Tiny Bookstore did this about 
every 90 days (or exactly 91.25 days). 
Note the following about the stock turnover ratio: 
* 
Stock turnover has two formulae, allowing the ratio to be expressed as the 
number of days or the number of times. 
* Ahigher number of times and a lower number of days is preferred, as this means 
that a business is being successful in selling its stock. More sales mean more 
revenue and usually more profit (unless sold at a discounted price). A higher 
number of times or lower number of days for the stock turnover also means that 
the stock is less likely to become obsolete. 
» Aswith other ratios, stock turnover ratios vary between industries. For 
example, businesses involved in the technology industry tend to have a better 
stock turnover than businesses involved in luxury items. Similarly, a store that 
sells perishable items like fruits and vegetables will want to have a better stock 
turnover ratio than a store that sells shelf-stable items like books. 
* Holding low levels of stock means low costs of holding stock (storage). Ideas like 
just-in-time stock control are discussed in Unit 5. 
* The stock turnover ratio can help decide which of the current and acid test ratios 
is a more accurate way to measure the liquidity of 
a business. For example, a 
business may have a poor stock turnover ratio, meaning it cannot rely on its stock 
being sold quickly and used to pay off short-term debts. Therefore, the acid test 
ratio would be a more appropriate way to assess the liquidity of the business.

There are strategies that businesses can use to improve the stock turnover ratio, 
including the following: 
« Implementing a more aggressive marketing strategy such as lowering 
prices or increasing promotion, which might help sell more. However, it is not 
guaranteed that the increased expenditure on marketing will bring higher sales 
and improve stock turnover ratio. 
 Disposing of slow-moving or obsolete stock: This might bring losses for the 
business but could reduce the stock turnover ratio. It might also result in the 
business having insufficient stock if there is a sudden surge in demand, and the 
business could lose potential sales and market share. 
» Narrowing the variety of products being offered: A business might choose 
to stock only fast-selling items in order to improve its stock turnover ratio. 
Thus, the rate of sales will improve, and storage costs will be reduced. However, 
the business might lose potential sales and market share of other items which, 
although slow-moving, still contribute to the covering of costs and provide 
opportunities for future growth. 
* Using stock management techniques like just-in-time (see Unit 5). This will 
ensure reduction of storage costs and no excess stock. However, if there is a sudden 
surge in demand, the business might be unable to respond quickly, and this will 
result in dissatisfied customers and a loss of sales and profits for the business. 
Debtor days 
The line item ‘debtors’ represents the amount of money owed to the business by 
customers. The debtor days ratio provides the average amount of time that customers 
take to pay for goods and services bought on credit. The formula to calculate the 
debtor days ratio is: 
debtors 
Debtor days ratio (number of days) = 
x 365 
total sales revenue 
In this ratio, the amount of debtors shown on the balance sheet is linked to total sales 
revenue. 
In general, the lower the debtor days ratio, the better. A low debtor days ratio provides 
the business with more cash on hand, as it indicates that the customers are paying off 
their purchases made on credit quicker. The cash received by the business can be used 
to pay its daily expenses and grow the business. A business with a high debtor days 
ratio may face liquidity problems, as it may not have sufficient cash on hand for its day- 
to-day operations. 
However, this ratio needs to be consistent with the company’s policy. For example, 
as a convenience to their customers and to maintain a positive relationship, many 
businesses provide 30 to 60 days of credit to their customers. Therefore, the debtor 
days ratio should be consistent with the organization’s policy, which is often between 
30 to 60 days. 
The bookstores example yields the following debtor days: 
Tiny Bookstore: 250 
1000 %365 = 91.25 days 
4 000 
Giant Bookstore: 
% 
365 = 73 days 
165

166 
Finance and accounts 
Giant Bookstore has a better debtor days ratio, although it is on the high side, 
averaging 73 days for customers to make payment on purchases made on credit. Tiny 
Bookstore customers average 91.25 days. Although these debtor days ratios may 
be consistent with the organizations’ policies and a key to maintaining a positive 
relationship with their customers, they could be a cause of concern. The managers of 
both bookstores, especially Tiny Bookstore, will need to make sure they have ample 
cash on hand to meet their daily business expenses. To fully assess the efficiency of 
these bookstores, trends over multiple years should be compared. 
To improve its debtor days ratio, a business can provide discounts to customers who 
pay early or in cash. This will encourage customers to pay cash or cover their debt 
early. However, this might result in losing sales as some customers might switch to 
different businesses due to favorable trade credit terms. 
Businesses could also penalize customers who take too long to pay by charging 
penalties. This might incentivize customers to pay on time and thus reduce the debtor 
days ratio for the business. However, some customers might switch suppliers and the 
business might lose them. A business can pursue legal means or refuse future sales 
until the customer pays off its debts. Again, this can result in the loss of customers, and 
the business will need to find new customers, which can present different risks. 
Creditor days 
Although creditors and debtors are balance sheet items, creditors is a current liability 
and debtors is a current asset. Creditors is the amount of money owed to suppliers due 
to purchases made on credit. The creditor days ratio is the average amount of time that 
it takes a business to pay for goods and services purchased on credit from its suppliers. 
The formula to calculate the creditor days ratio is: 
Creditor days ratio (number of days) = _creditors %365 
cost of sales 
In this ratio, the amount of creditors is linked to the cost of sales. 
In general, the higher the creditor days ratio, the better. A higher creditor days ratio 
provides the business with more cash on hand. The business is taking advantage of 
the free credit being offered by its suppliers. This could help a business minimize the 
need to take on other short-term debt like overdrafts. However, just like the debtors 
days ratio, the creditor days ratio should be compared with the terms offered by its 
suppliers. If the creditor days ratio is much higher than what is being offered, then 
penalties may have been incurred. In addition, the relationships between the suppliers 
and the business may be strained. If the creditor days ratio is much lower than what is 
being offered, then the organization may not be taking full advantage of the free credit 
being offered. 
The creditor days ratios for Tiny Bookstore and Giant Bookstore are as follows: 
Tiny Bookstore: 570—50 %365 = 54.75 days 
Giant Bookstore: 2400 
8 000 x 365 = 109.5 days 
To analyze these ratios, it is important to put them into context and look at historical 
data to analyze trends. The high creditor days for Giant Bookstore may indicate a 
problem. Most businesses offer credit terms between 30 and 60 days. Taking over

100 days to pay creditors may mean that Giant Bookstore is also paying penalties. 
Although this could help Giant Bookstore free up cash for other purposes, it may also 
put a strain on its relationship with suppliers. 
Strategies to improve an organization’s creditor days may involve negotiating with 
its suppliers for an extended credit period. This will allow the business to maintain 
sufficient cash on hand and, at the same time, not incur any additional penalties. 
Negotiating with suppliers for an extension of trade credit might threaten the 
suppliers’ survival as they rely on customers to pay on time. 
In addition, a business may choose to manage creditor days through better stock 
control. For example, a business could implement just-in-time stock control, which will 
save storage costs, and cash will not be tied up in stock. The business will acquire the 
stock (inventory) when it is needed and will not need to use trade credit with suppliers. 
However, just-in-time stock control (see Unit 5) requires special arrangements and 
equipment that is costly and not always efficient. 
Gearing ratio 
The gearing ratio measures how much of the business is funded through long-term 
debt or loan capital. The formula for calculating the gearing ratio is: 
: 
: 
non-current liabilities 
Gearing ratio = 
= 100 
capital employed 
where capital employed = non-current liabilities + equity 
This is an important ratio for investors and lenders to assess the financial risk of 
a 
business. Too high a gearing ratio suggests that a business may be unable to make 
interest payments and|or pay off the loan. A business that is highly geared will also 
be negatively affected by any sudden increases in interest rates, as it will need to make 
higher interest payments. In contrast, a gearing ratio that is too low suggests that a 
business may be playing it too safe and not using the credit available to it to grow. 
Having too low a gearing ratio is usually not much of a concern for a business as it 
indicates room for future expansion. 
What is the ideal gearing ratio? This will depend on the context of the business and the 
industry in which it operates. For example, mature companies with a reliable cash flow 
may tolerate a higher gearing ratio. However, an ideal gearing ratio for most businesses 
is usually between 25 and 50 per cent. Above 50 per cent is usually considered too 
high, and below 25 per cent is considered too low. 
Gearing ratio calculations for the two bookstores are: 
Tiny Bookstore: 
750 
x 100 = 60% 
750 + 300 + 200 
5000 
i 
. 
365 = 20% 
Giant Bookstore: 5000 415 000 +5 000 X 
Although both bookstores fall outside the ideal range, it appears that Giant Bookstore 
is in a better position. Having a lower gearing ratio means that Giant Bookstore is 
less susceptible to sudden increases in the interest rate and more appealing to lenders 
167

168 
Finance and accounts 
and investors. In addition, a lower gearing ratio indicates room for further expansion 
through the acquisition of additional long-term loans. In contrast, Tiny Bookstore is 
highly geared, which indicates that a large portion of its business is funded through 
long-term loans. This could cause long-term liquidity problems due to the high 
interest and loan payments it will need to make. 
To improve (lower) its gearing ratio, a business can pursue alternative sources of 
finance rather than loan capital. For example, sale of shares (privately and publicly 
held companies) can raise more equity capital for the business as a source of finance. 
However, this might lead to reduced control of the business by the initial shareholders 
and dilution of ownership. 
A business could decrease dividends to increase retained profit and capital employed. 
Increasing retained profit will result in a lower gearing ratio as retained profit is part of 
the equity of the business. This can be achieved by reducing cost of sales and expenses, 
or by increasing sales revenue without raising expenses (costs of sales are more 
likely to increase proportionately). Increasing retained earnings might affect some 
stakeholders, such as shareholders who will see their dividends decrease. As a result, 
they might decide to sell their shares (for publicly held companies) and invest in other 
ventures. Such sales might reduce the price of shares on the stock exchange, which 
reduces the interest of potential future investors. 
Insolvency versus bankruptcy 
Stakeholders are keen to measure and monitor the liquidity of 
a business. The liquidity 
ratios compare current assets and current liabilities and are one way to determine 
whether a business has enough liquid assets to pay its debts. 
Insolvency occurs when a business is unable to pay debts that become due. Although 
a poor liquidity ratio may indicate insolvency, this is not always the case. Insolvency 
can occur even if total assets exceed total liabilities. For example, an organization that 
has assets which cannot be converted to cash in time to meet debts as they mature can 
become insolvent. Insolvency does not necessarily mean business failure: a business 
may still be able to make plans to solve this problem, such as rescheduling its debt. 
[nsolvency can be temporary and reversed. 
Bankruptcy is when a business is judged by a court of law to be unable to pay its 
debts. A bankrupt company's liabilities exceed assets, and it is deemed unable to fix 
this problem and pay its debts. A business that declares bankruptcy has failed and, 
in most cases, ceases to exist, at least in its current form of ownership. Its assets 
are distributed to the people and organizations it owes (creditors and lenders), and 
sometimes shareholders. Bankruptcy can be involuntary, when one or more creditors 
bring a petition against the debtor, or more often it is voluntary, when the debtor files a 
petition claiming inability to meet debts. 
A business can experience insolvency but avoid bankruptcy. However, a company that 
experiences bankruptcy is always insolvent. Insolvency and bankruptcy can also be 
applied to individuals. 
The ratio analyses discussed earlier are good indicators of the direction a business is 
heading. To avoid insolvency and bankruptcy, businesses can monitor their financial 
performance and position using ratio analysis and can try to take appropriate action to 
reverse any negative trends.

