Case study — Marvel 
Insolvency and even bankruptcy can be a common occurrence in the dynamic world 
of business. According to Britannica.com, the US media and entertainment company 
Marvel declared bankruptcy in 1996. The company, known for popular comic book 
characters like Spider-Man, Thor, Iron Man, and the Incredible Hulk, later reorganized 
and was purchased by the Walt Disney Company for $4 billion in 2009. 
Activity 
Working individually or with a partner, compare the financial statements of two 
competing businesses (for example, Amazon and Alibaba, Aldi and Lidl, Samsung 
and Apple). Remember only publicly held companies are required to publish their 
financial statements. The best place to find financial statements is usually in the 
investor section of the company website. 
1 Compare and contrast the profitability, liquidity, or efficiency of your selected 
businesses. (You may need to calculate the appropriate ratios, or you may be 
able to find them in a business’ annual report.) 
2 Recommend one strategy for one of the organizations to improve its 
profitability, liquidity, or efficiency. 
Practice questions 
With reference to an organization of your choice, distinguish between insolvency 
and bankruptcy. 
(4 marks) 
3.7 Cash flow 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
explain the difference between profit and cash flow 
* 
calculate and explain working capital 
+ 
analyze the liquidity position of 
a business 
* 
prepare and analyze cash flow forecasts 
 explain the relationship between investment, profit, and cash flow 
+ recommend strategies for dealing with cash flow problems. 
In this section, we will learn more about cash and cash flow from a business perspective. 
Think back to the balance sheet earlier in this unit. Cash is a line item within the current 
asset section of this financial statement. In this context, cash represents the value of 
liquid assets that are on hand (either held in a bank account or held by the business) that 
are used up within a year to pay for daily expenditures like wages and raw materials. 
The cash flow of a business is the movement, the inflows and outflows, of these funds. 
Think of cash flow as the money going into and out of a company’s ‘wallet’ or bank 
account. 
169

170 
Finance and accounts 
In this section, we will compare cash flow to other financial terms like profit and 
investment. We will then discuss how to prepare and analyze cash flow forecasts. 
Finally, we will look at some recommended strategies for dealing with cash flow 
problems. 
Profit versus cash flow 
You may think that profit and cash flow are the same thing. In some cases (such as cash 
transactions), net cash flow (cash inflows minus cash outflows) and profit are the same. 
However, many business transactions are done on credit, and when this is the case, 
profit and cash flow are different. 
Profit is calculated by subtracting expenses from revenue. The key to understanding 
the difference between profit and cash flow relies on an understanding of accounting 
principles, specifically the accrual method of accounting. Using the accrual method 
of accounting means that revenue, expenses, and profit are recorded and calculated 
on the date they are earned or the date they are incurred. However, credit sales and 
expenses do not immediately impact cash flow, or the actual movement of funds. The 
cash inflows and outflows only occur when the payment is made or received. In other 
words, a timing difference can exist between the accrual of a revenue or an expense 
and the actual exchange of funds. 
For example, Company A sells €1,000 of merchandise to Company B during the month 
of January. Company A then invoices Company B for payment, and Company B pays 
Company A in February. Since the sale occurs in January, this sale is recorded in 
January as revenue using the accrual method, contributing to the profit of Company A. 
This expense is recorded in January for Company B. However, no cash is exchanged in 
January, so the impact on the cash flow in January for Company A and Company B is 
zero. Instead, payment is made and collected in February, and this is when Company A 
will experience a cash inflow and Company B will experience a cash outflow from this 
transaction. 
It is important for businesses to keep track of cash flow as well as profit because a 
firm can be profitable but end up going bankrupt due to cash flow problems. Both 
cash flow and profit play an important role in any business. For example, a company 
could have a large deal in place that will bring in immediate revenue and thus appear 
profitable. However, if the transaction is done on credit and the company does not 
manage its cash flow well, it may struggle to pay its bills and short-term debts when 
they become due. 
Cash flow is used in quantitative tools such as investment appraisal and cash flow 
forecasts, while profit is used in break-even analysis, final accounts, budgeting, and 
ratio analysis. 
Liquidity and working capital 
Earlier in this unit, liquidity ratios were explored as a way to analyze the financial 
stability of a business and its ability to meet any short-term debt obligations. Two 
liquidity ratios were discussed: the current ratio and the acid test ratio. These ratios 
compared current assets and current liabilities, which can be found in the statement of 
financial position (the balance sheet).

Working capital provides another measure of liquidity. However, rather than 
calculating liquidity as a ratio, working capital is calculated by subtracting the total 
current liabilities from the total current assets. Although the needs of individual 
businesses vary depending on the circumstances, most businesses will want to have a 
positive amount of working capital. An organization with sufficient working capital 
on hand can meet its daily obligations (raw materials, wages, and so on) and keep the 
business running. Organizations that have insufficient working capital may experience 
insolvency. 
Case study - Alibaba and Amazon 
For some companies, converting raw materials into sales is a lengthy process and 
demands a significant amount of working capital on hand to make this happen. 
This is especially true for traditional brick-and-mortar retailers, as they must 
purchase large amounts of inventory well ahead of any sales in order to attract 
customers. Many of these retailers cannot rely on quickly converting their 
inventory into sales, and they will need substantial working capital to run their daily 
operations. 
Large e-commerce retailers like Alibaba and Amazon show that this does not have 
to be the case. These retailers collect payment from their customers before they pay 
their suppliers. This means they do not need much working capital, as they rely on 
consistent and rapid sales to run their daily operations. 
Profit, cash flow, and investment 
To understand the relationship between profit, cash flow, and investment, it is helpful 
to think about how a new business starts. 
Most business start-ups need to make significant capital expenditures initially to 
generate sales. The capital expenditures are considered an investment. For example, 
a manufacturing company will need to purchase the equipment, machinery, and 
possibly a factory, to manufacture their product. Office or retail space may be required 
for businesses that operate in the service sector. Investments are usually quite high in 
the early stages of a business. 
How does this relate to profit and cash flow? Initially, businesses will have trouble 
making a profit. Most start-ups will lose money early in the business. However, if smart 
investments are made, sales will eventually grow and so will profits. 
Cash flow will take a similar path, but due to the timing involved in receiving payment 
from sales on credit and the working capital requirements during this time of increased 
sales (such as high labor and/or manufacturing costs), the cash flow of 
a business 
tends to lag behind the profit amounts. However, once profits and cash inflows are 
received, additional investments can be made. This cycle and the relationship between 
investment, profit, and cash flow is shown in Figure 3.11. 
To remain successful, mature businesses need to capitalize on this investment, 
profit, and cash flow cycle. For example, an investment can be made in research and 
development to improve a product or service. Alternatively, a manufacturing company 
can invest in a new, environmentally friendly machine. Wise investments will lead to 
171

Finance and accounts 
an increase in sales and profits, and eventually improve cash flow. If a poor investment 
or no investment is made, then a business’ sales, profit levels, and eventually cash flow 
will suffer in the long term. 
Figure3.11 
 Relationship pp 
between investment, profit, 
and cash flow 
An investment is made to improve 
profit and cash flow 
As payments are 
Due to the increase 
received and working 
in investment, sales 
capital requirements 
increase and 
diminish, cash flow 
eventually profits 
improves 
increase 
Cash flow forecasts 
Given the potential delay in receiving cash inflows, and the dangers in not having 
sufficient cash on hand to meet the daily obligations of a business, owners and 
managers need to plan and create a cash flow forecast. 
Cash flow forecasts differ from cash flow statements. Cash flow statements are 
historical financial statements that are usually published along with profit and loss 
accounts and balance sheets. Cash flow forecasts include projected cash inflows and 
outflows for future time periods (often monthly). 
A cash flow forecast shows the following for a business: 
* opening balance 
+ 
cashinflows 
e 
cash outflows 
* 
net cash flow 
* 
closing balance. 
Cash flow forecasts will be in the format shown in Figure 3.12 in case studies and 
examination questions. 
Preparing a cash flow forecast has many benefits. Cash flows forecasts can: 
* show when there might be a cash shortfall (for example, Figure 3.12 shows a 
negative closing balance in March for ABC Ltd) 
172

Cash flow forecast for ABC Ltd or ABC for the first three months of 20XX 
<« Figure3.12 Cash flow 
forecast for a profit-making ar 
All figures in $m 
January 
February 
March 
non-profit entity 
Opening balance 
8 
2 
1 
Cash inflows 
Cash sales revenue 
300 
300 
300 
Tax refund 
3 
Total cash inflows 
300 
303 
300 
Cash outflows 
Rent 
2 
Packaging 
15 
15 
15 
Salaries and wages 
50 
50 
50 
Cost of sales 
220 
220 
220 
Heating and lighting 
4 
4 
4 
Delivery 
15 
15 
15 
Total cash outflows 
306 
304 
304 
Net cash flow 
(6) 
1) 
(4) 
Closing balance 
2 
1 
(3) 
» 
allow managers to work through different scenarios (for example, ABC Ltd may 
consider securing a loan to avoid any cash shortfall) 
» 
allow managers to plan and inform stakeholders like banks when additional 
finance is needed. 
However, cash flow forecasts do have limitations. They are based on projected 
amounts, and the accuracy of these values can vary, especially given the dynamic 
nature of business and the external environment. In addition, cash flow forecasts do 
not indicate future profit levels. Remember, although cash flow usually aligns with 
profit, cash flow and profit are different concepts. 
Worked example 
Carolina plans to set up a bakery, Las Migas, in a small town. Competition from 
established bakeries is strong. Carolina has asked for a bank loan because her 
personal savings are insufficient. The bank manager has requested: 
 abusiness plan 
+ acash flow forecast for the first four months of operations. 
Carolina has no experience with financial forecasts, but she estimates the amounts 
for Las Migas for the first four months of operations. These amounts are shown in 
the following table. 
173

174 
Finance and accounts 
Estimated amounts for Las Migas for the first four months of operations 
Estimated sales per month 
For the first two months of operations: 
$1,500 
From the third month of operations 
onwards: $3,500 
Monthly rent 
£1000 
Opening balance 
$100 
Cost of sales 
30% of sales 
Heating and lighting 
1% of sales 
Carolina’s monthly salary 
$380 
Questions 
1 
Prepare a cash flow forecast for Las Migas for the first four months of operations. 
Solution 
1 Cash flow forecast for Las Migas (all amounts in $) 
Month 1 
Month 2 
Month 3 
Month 4 
Opening balance 
100 
(255) 
(610) 
415 
Cash inflows 
Cash sales revenue 
1500 
1500 
3500 
3 500 
Total cash inflows 
1500 
1500 
3 500 
3 500 
Cash outflows 
Rent 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
Salary 
390 
390 
390 
390 
Cost of sales 
450 
450 
1050 
1050 
Heating and lighting 
15 
15 
35 
35 
Total cash outflows 
1855 
1855 
2475 
2475 
Net cash flow 
(355) 
(355) 
1025 
1025 
Closing balance 
(255) 
(610) 
415 
1440 
Dealing with cash flow problems 
If a cash flow forecast reveals cash flow problems for a business, then strategies will 
need to be developed in order to deal with these problems. Cash inflows will need to 
be increased and/or cash outflows will need to be reduced. Choosing the most relevant 
strategy or strategies will depend on the situation. Some strategies that a business may 
implement include the following: 
Use alternative, cheaper suppliers: In the cash flow forecast, the cost of sales is the 
largest cash outflow for ABC Ltd, and finding a way to reduce the cost of items like raw 
materials will help reduce this cash outflow item. Finding a new supplier often takes time, 
and it could negatively impact the brand and product quality but could improve cash flow.

Reduce debtor days and|or increase creditor days: A business can extend the 
amount of time it takes to pay its current suppliers. Alternatively, it can require its 
customers to make payments sooner. This will improve cash flow but may put a strain 
on the relationships between key stakeholders. 
Implement debt factoring: Debt factoring is a financial service that a third-party 
business can provide an organization with that is having cash flow problems and 
trouble collecting payments from its debtors. An agreement is made between a 
business and a third party whereby the business sells its debts in exchange for a 
percentage of the total amount originally charged. The business does not receive the 
entire amount of debt owed but receives a much-needed cash advance from the third 
party, which then collects full payment from the debtors. By using debt factoring, a 
business can meet its payments on time with the cash received. However, the business 
will lose some money as the debt collector does not pay the entire amount of the debt. 
Implement stock control techniques like just-in-time (JIT): This will help reduce 
costs related to maintaining stock for companies involved in manufacturing and retail, 
although this is not as relevant for 
a business involved in the service industry. However, 
the lack of stock in storage may hinder the business’s ability to react if there is a sudden 
surge in demand. 
Reduce other expenses: Managers can review and examine current expenditures 
like packaging, salaries and wages, and delivery costs, and see if there are any ways to 
reduce these amounts. However, reducing salaries, wages, and fringe benefits might 
negatively affect the motivation of employees and reduce productivity. 
Implement marketing strategies: Some examples that could improve cash flow 
include a reduction in pricing to increase sales, enhanced promotion, or improving the 
product portfolio. However, reduction in pricing might not achieve the desired effect 
of increased sales and may lead to losses. Promotion can be expensive, and this will 
increase cash outflows and might not achieve increased sales. Improving the product 
portfolio by introducing new products is costly (research and development are 
expensive activities), and terminating less successful and slow-moving products might 
also affect the cash inflows negatively. 
Obtain additional short-term financing: Although overdrafts can be costly due 
to high interest rates, they are designed to help businesses manage any cash flow 
problems that may emerge from seasonal sales. 
Practice questions 
With reference to an organization of your choice, explain the difference 
between profit and cash flow. 
(4 marks) 
175

