Conceptual understandings 
* 
Social, cultural, and technological change can impact the language and medium 
of marketing. 
+ Creative ways of informing stakeholders can lead to positive business outcomes. 
* 
Ethical marketing practices can enhance a business’ brand image. 
+ Sustainable marketing practices can be effective for business success. 
4.1 Introduction to marketing 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
+ 
distinguish between market orientation and product orientation 
calculate and analyze market share 
calculate and analyze market growth 
discuss the importance of market share and market leadership. 
These are questions based on themes within this unit that you could conduct some 
independent research about. You could explore: 
» How might marketing strategies evolve in response to changeable customer 
preferences? 
» Why can effective market research bring about creative business practice? 
* How could social media development change an organization’s marketing strategies? 
*  Why could globalization bring many changes to business activity? 
» Why are successful marketing campaigns increasingly being built around the 
ethical and sustainable practices of a business? 
Welcome to the world of marketing! Most of us can say that we have already been here. 
After all, from the moment we wake up and turn off our alarm clock to the moment 
we put our head on our pillow at night, we are surrounded by products, services, and 
brands. With the increased use of ubiquitous technologies such as smartphones and 
wearable devices, the presence of marketing activity has become even more apparent. 
But what exactly is marketing? And how should we approach marketing in this course? 
Consulting ten different sources on the definition of marketing might result in 
ten different definitions. But most, if not all, definitions of marketing will have the 
following key points: 
» Marketing is about identifying, anticipating, and meeting the needs and wants of 
customers and society. 
» 
Marketing is more than just a promotion, slogan, or logo. Marketing involves 
all aspects of the marketing mix — product, price, promotion, place, people, 
processes, and physical evidence. 
* 
Marketing is about the way an organization communicates the value it can bring 
to, and how it connects with, its target audience. 
191

Online resources 
For more on the fascinating 
world of content marketing 
use this QR code. 
IB learner profile 
Open-minded 
Although you may have several 
preconceived notions about 
marketing as a consumer, it 
will be important to be open- 
minded during our study 
of marketing and consider 
marketing from the perspective 
of other stakeholders 
(e.g., managers). 
192 
Marketing 
Interesting information 
l 
A traditional approach to marketing stresses that marketing success is all about getting 
the marketing mix right. If a business can just get the right product, at the right price, 
in the right place, and with the right promotion, then success will come. While the 
marketing mix certainly plays a major role in any marketing program and will be a 
big part of this unit, one interesting trend in marketing has emerged in response to the 
increasing use of technologies in the hands of consumers. Technology today allows 
consumers to ignore advertising and irrelevant content. As a result, brands now need 
to have a compelling and remarkable story to tell so they can capture the interest of 
today’s consumers. All of this puts an emphasis on the key point that marketing is 
about the way organizations communicate the value they can bring to, and how they 
connect with, their target audience, and leads to the idea of content marketing. 
The Content Marketing Institute defines content marketing as: 
The strategic marketing approach of creating and distributing valuable, 
relevant, and consistent content to attract and acquire a clearly defined 
audience — with the objective of driving profitable customer action. 
Marketing is much more than a simple advertisement or logo. Marketing involves a 
dynamic range of activity and tasks that require an in-depth study of multiple, related 
concepts to fully understand. 
Perhaps, even more than the other main functions of business (human resources, 
finance, and operations), marketing relies on the key concept of creativity, requiring 
entrepreneurs, managers, and students to stay open to new possibilities and 
perspectives. For example, although traditional approaches to marketing focus on 
sales and profits, most (if not all) non-profit organizations and social enterprises use 
marketing as they pursue and meet their social objectives in a creative manner. 
Case study - Aravind Eye Care 
Social marketing applies marketing principles and techniques to change social behaviors 
and promote awareness of social issues. This is commonly used in public health and was 
adopted by Dr Govindappa Venkataswamy, founder of Aravind Eye Care, as it pursued 
its mission to eliminate needless blindness. By applying social marketing and providing 
large volume, high-quality and affordable eye care, Aravind Eye Care has been able to 
change the behavior and eye health of millions of people in India. 
Explain the role of marketing for social enterprises like Avarind Eye Care. 
This first section on marketing looks at the different ways organizations can approach 
marketing and how organizations can measure their efforts. 
Market versus product orientation 
One way to understand how organizations approach marketing is through the ideas of 
market orientation and product orientation.

Organizations that use a product orientation approach focus their activity on making the 
best product possible and emphasize the features of that product throughout the marketing 
process. [t assumes that there will always be a market for the products the firm makes. 
Product orientation is driven more by technical innovation than by consumer needs. 
In an interview with Fortune magazine, Steve ]obs (co-founder and former CEO 
of Apple) once said “We do no market research’. What does that mean? Does this 
mean that Apple did not think about the needs and wants of its customers when 
designing the iPhone or iPad? Can a typical business be successful taking such a drastic 
approach? Do you think Apple is still taking this approach? 
To really understand what is meant by this statement, we need to consider the context. Take 
the example of the Apple iPhone. Consumers were not aware that such a revolutionary 
product could be invented and developed. But, thanks to Apple and the innovation of other 
technology companies, the smartphone industry is now worth hundreds of billions of 
dollars. Other examples of product orientation can often be found in the pharmaceuticals 
and electronics industries. Remember, product orientation rests on the belief that if an 
innovative product is produced of good quality, then consumers will purchase it. 
Market orientation focuses on identifying and satisfying consumer needs through 
market research and analysis. The accessibility and availability of data is generating a 
major shift toward market orientation, making it easier for organizations to capture 
market and consumer behaviors and trends. Rather than going on what the business 
Table 4.1 The key features of product orientation and market orientation 
Product orientation 
Market orientation 
Focuses on building a quality product 
Focuses on meeting the needs of 
customers 
Internal looking 
External looking 
No market research is used 
Extensive market research is used 
Believes that an innovative product (key) 
Believes that a business must first 
will sell 
understand the needs and wants of 
the market (lock) 
Advantages: 
Advantages: 
* 
Puts focus on specializing in producing | « 
Looks to minimize risk by 
high-quality products 
conducting market research 
» 
Eliminates the need for market 
* 
Canrespond to changes and new 
research, giving full control over its 
ideas in the market 
activities to the business 
Disadvantages: 
Disadvantages: 
» 
Canlead to an outdated or obsolete 
+ 
Market research can be costly 
product, creating waste, and lead to 
* 
Can be difficult to capture 
unsustainable business practices 
current trends 
» 
Canberisky 
* 
Canslow down innovation 
» 
Usually requires high research and 
development costs 
* 
Can have negative ethical implications 
as businesses use marketing techniques 
to persuade and convince consumers 
to purchase these products 
193

4 
Figure4.1 Most P 
organizations use a 
combination of product 
and market orientation 
194 
Marketing 
Most businesses use 
both a market and 
product orientation 
approach. 
Number of businesses 
Product orientation 
Market orientation 
thinks is right for the customer, a market orientation approach results in activity and 
decisions that are based around what customers need and want. 
Another way to distinguish between these two approaches is to consider Seth Godin’s 
lock and key analogy presented in his book This is Marketing. A product orientation 
approach would start by making a key (a product) thinking it will easily find the right 
lock (the right market). While this can be done, it is quite rare and challenging. In 
contrast, a market orientation approach starts with the lock (people’s dreams and 
desires) and makes a key (product) just for them. 
Although product and market orientation are two distinct approaches to marketing, 
like most things, nearly all organizations fall somewhere in the middle. Most 
organizations take a product orientation approach at some times (focusing on creating 
a new, innovative product) and a market orientation approach at others (focusing on 
meeting the needs and wants of their customers). 
Market share and market growth 
Before getting too far into the topic of marketing, we will need to spend some time 
understanding what is meant by the term market and how it can be measured. 
‘Market’ has many meanings, but in general business terms, a market is a place where 
buyers and sellers gather. A market can be categorized in different ways (such as 
geography, size, industry, product type). The size of the market can be measured in 
terms of the value of sales or the number of units sold. 
Once the market size is known, then an organization can calculate its market share, 
or the percentage of its total sales in relation to the total market sales. Market share can 
be calculated in terms of sales revenue (the money spent on all goods sold) using the 
following formula: 
sales revenue of organisation 
Revenue market share = 
x 100 
total sales revenue of the market 
Alternatively, market share can be calculated by volume or the number of units sold: 
units of sales of an organisation 
Unit market share = 
x 100 
total unit sales of the market

Larger companies often compete in multiple markets (they sell multiple products or 
sell in multiple geographic regions). Therefore, it is important to clearly define the 
market being studied when analyzing market share data. 
In addition to market share, market growth can be measured. Market growth can 
be expressed in terms of the percentage change in the market size over a given period 
(such as one year). This can be based on the sales revenue. 
current sales revenue — previous sales revenue % 100 
Revenue market growth = 
previous sales revenue 
Alternatively, this can be calculated based on the units sold. 
current units of sales — previous units of sales 
Unit market growth = 
x 100 
previous units of sales 
For example, the total sales revenue (in billions of US dollars) of the airline industry 
worldwide is shown in Figure 4.2. 
Using this data, market growth, or the change in the market size, can be calculated for 
2019, 2020, and 2021 as follows (percentages are rounded to two decimal places): 
Market growth, 2019 
$818.32 — $806.56 
ST 
x 100 
= 1.46% 
Market growth, 2020 
$359.30 — $818.32 
$818.32 
x 100 ~ —56.09% 
Market growth, 2021 
$471.82 — $359.30 
$359.30 
x 100 
=~ 31.32% 
Market size of airline industry worldwide 
in billions of $ 
1,000.00 
Market size in billions of § 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Year 
«f Figured.2 Marketsize 
of global airline industry 
(S, billions) 
195

196 
Marketing 
As expected, the airline industry has been quite volatile since the start of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. However, the growth in sales of over 30 per cent in 2021 shows 
that the industry may well have started to recover. 
The importance of market share and 
market leadership 
Market share can be an important indicator of success for a business. It is a way for a 
business to measure consumer preferences in relation to its competitors. A high market 
share indicates effective marketing practices and often leads to higher profit margins. 
A market leader is typically the organization with the highest market share in a particular 
market. Market leadership can bring many benefits to an organization including: 
* The ability to influence its competitors: Many businesses look to see what their 
major competitors are doing and try to replicate their success. This means that 
market leaders can have more of 
an impact on the market. For example, market 
leaders can determine and set prices for their goods and services that other, 
smaller competitors will often need to follow. Furthermore, social enterprises that 
are market leaders can inspire others to adopt behaviors and products that align 
with the organization’s social objectives. 
* 
Brand recognition: Having the top market share means most consumers and 
competitors know about your business, resulting in a higher brand value. A 
market leader has an easier time developing its brand as it can include their 
leadership position in promotional materials. 
» Growth: Being a market leader often means that the business will have increasing 
sales and profits. A market leader can benefit from economies of scale to fuel 
its growth. Economies of scale allow the business to produce at a lower unit 
cost compared to smaller competitors (see 1.5 Economies and diseconomies of 
scale). The business can use this advantage to reduce prices and attract even more 
customers. Or it can use this cost advantage to pay for improvements in the product. 
* Human resource benefits: Many employees want to work for the best. Market 
leaders can provide job stability and afford to pay their workers a quality wage. 
Workers can be highly motivated working for a market leader knowing that their 
work is making a large impact. 
At the same time, being a market leader can make things more difficult for a business. 
Market leaders attract competition. In fact, competitors operating in the same market 
see the market leaders as the main competition and will do what they can to capture 
some of their market share. Some businesses become so large that they dominate the 
market. This can attract the attention of government regulators.

Additional limitations of market leadership can be ascertained by considering the 
impact on the environment and other stakeholders like the customer. For example, too 
much growth can negatively affect the environment and be unsustainable. In addition, 
when a business dominates a particular market, the customer often suffers due to the 
lack of competition, innovation, and affordable prices. 
Furthermore, caution should be used when using and interpreting market share 
information. As mentioned earlier, for market share data to be valuable to an 
organization, the market must be clearly defined. This is not always easy, as 
organizations can be involved in multiple markets with multiple products. Access 
to accurate data can be challenging. Furthermore, the fact that market share can 
be calculated in two different ways (by sales revenue and by units sold) can lead to 
different or conflicting results. Lastly, as we saw with the airline industry figures earlier, 
it is important to consider the context of the situation. Businesses operate in a dynamic 
environment and things can, and often do, change quite rapidly. 
Practice questions 
Market share 
Consider the following annual unit sales amounts for the entire market and for 
Company A and Company B. 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Unit sales for market 
1 500 000 
1720000 
1900 000 
Unit sales for Company A 
350 000 
325000 
320 000 
Unit sales for Company B 
60 000 
95000 
150 000 
Company A’s market share for Year 1 can be calculated as follows: 
350000 
b 
x 100 = 23.3% (rounded to 1 decimal place) 
1 500 000 
Company B’s market share for Year 1 can be calculated as follows: 
60 000 
—— 
x100=4% 
1 500 000 
1 
Calculate the market share for Company A and Company B 
for Years 2 and 3. 
(2 marks) 
2 
Describe any trends in the market share data. 
(2 marks) 
Market growth 
The following table shows estimated global automobile sales amounts ($, trillions) 
as provided by ibisworld.com. 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
$3.8 
$3.25 
$3.6 
$3.8 
The annual market growth of automobile sales for 2020 is calculated below: 
W 
% 100 = —14.5% (rounded to 1 decimal place) 
1 
 Calculate the annual market growth of automobile sales for 2021 and 2022. (2 marks) 
2 
Describe any trends in the market growth data. 
(2 marks) 
IB learner profile 
Thinkers 
One challenge often faced by 
marketers is how to measure 
the impact of their marketing 
activity. Market share is one 
quantitative measure that can 
be used. Can you think of other 
ways to guantitatively measure 
the impact of marketing 
activity? 
197

