SWOT analysis 
looks at an 
organization's strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats 
198 
> 
Marketing 
4.2 Marketing planning 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* explain the role of marketing planning 
* explain segmentation, targeting (target market) and positioning 
* 
construct position maps 
* explain the difference between niche market and mass market 
* explain the importance of having a unique selling point/proposition (USP) 
* examine how organizations can differentiate themselves and their products 
from competitors. 
Now that we have been introduced to what marketing is and how it can be measured, 
we will look more closely at the different ways organizations can approach marketing 
activity. 
Marketing planning 
Following the business plan that was discussed in Unit 1, each division of a business 
(such as the marketing division) will do some planning of its own. Although each 
business can go about the planning process differently, the typical elements of a 
marketing plan include: 
» 
amarket analysis, which may include background data on the market, market 
research, and a SWOT or STEEPLE analysis 
¢ 
details of the marketing objectives and goals of the business including the target 
market 
marketing strategies (which may include the 7Ps of the marketing mix), which 
explain how the organization will accomplish its marketing objectives 
financial projections including the marketing budget and sales forecasts 
* 
adetailed action plan explaining the next steps, how the actions will be 
monitored, and, perhaps, contingency plans. 
A 
STRENGTHS | WEAKNESSES 
internal 
external 
OPPORTUNITIES 
positive 
negative

This marketing plan, and marketing planning in general, helps organizations in several 
ways. It includes developing a clear understanding of: 
* 
the market in general, and the needs and wants of the target market 
« 
the organization’s marketing objectives and how to accomplish them 
* 
the financial constraints in which it will need to operate 
* 
the potential problems it may face 
 how its marketing activity fits in with the rest of the organization 
« 
the systems and processes that are in place to monitor and improve its marketing 
activity. 
Segmentation, targeting, and positioning 
When studying the market, the majority of successful organizations go through 
a process called market segmentation. In market segmentation, organizations 
collect, organize, and analyze market research to identify and categorize different 
groups of people into market segments. These groups or segments share one or more 
characteristics or traits. 
The main ways in which a market can be segmented are by: 
 demographics: age, education, income, religion, etc. 
* 
psychographics: attitudes, tastes, values, behaviors, etc. 
» 
geographics: country, state, town, climates, etc. 
Identifying market segments cannot always be done effectively, but with the increase in 
digital traffic and commerce, a vast amount of data is being collected for this purpose. 
When organizations understand different market segments, they can develop their 
marketing strategies and marketing mix (product, price, promotion, etc.) by targeting 
a particular segment or target market. It should be noted that organizations do this 
to varying degrees. This will be explored later in this section when mass and niche 
markets are discussed. 
One way to develop an effective targeting strategy is through positioning. Market 
positioning is when a business seeks to identify its brand within a certain part of the 
market. For example, a business may want to position itself 
as a luxury or budget 
brand, or a modern or traditional brand. One visual technique that can be used to 
determine the most appropriate market positioning strategy is position maps. 
Position maps 
Let’s take a moment to think about different types, brands, prices, and flavors of ice 
creams. Which brand name comes to mind when you think of top-quality ice cream? 
Likewise, which brand name comes to mind when you think of cheap ice cream? 
Are there any other brands that you think are in between the top quality one and the 
cheap one? 
Just as you hold different views about different ice cream brands, customers hold 
various views or perceptions for almost any product. Companies trace or plot these 
views or perceptions that customers hold of their products onto a map known as a 
position map or perception map. 
If you locked up the top 
reasons businesses fail, 
what do you think you 
would find? In addition to 
funding and poor financial 
management, lack of 
planning is on the top of 
many lists. 
Read these two articles to 
find out mare. 
Laura Scott, ‘The Four 
Major Reasons for New 
Business Failure’ 
Melissa Horton, 'The Four 
Mast Commaon Reasons 
a Small Business Fails' 
199

Many disciplines use the 
idea of categorization to 
develop understanding 
and determine the 
appropriate action. 
For example, biology 
students know that the 
number of organisms 
to study seems infinite. 
According to one study 
published by the National 
Institute of Health, there 
are over 8 million species 
and many more still to be 
discovered. The modern 
taxonomic classification 
system attempts to make 
this more manageable 
by using eight levels to 
categorize these species: 
domain, kingdom, 
phylum, class, order, 
family, genus, and species. 
Another example is 
medicine, where doctors 
use diagnostic codes to 
identify ailments and 
determine the maost 
effective treatment. 
Figure 4.3 Anexampleofa 
position map for ice cream 
200 
'S 
Marketing 
Usually, two variables are plotted graphically on a position map. The variables chosen 
depend on what the organization thinks are most important. For this example, and in 
many cases, quality and price are selected. 
Next, market research is gathered to place the organization and its competitors in 
terms of price and quality. Although quantitative information may be available for 
price, identifying the customers’ perceptions on quality can be more challenging. 
Utilizing the expertise of market research professionals can provide accurate and more 
insightful data. 
Figure 4.3 is an example of a position map. The brands’ positions can vary by region 
and change over time. 
The last step of market positioning is to identify where a gap exists in the market, so 
the company can position itself strategically. If you were to start an ice cream business, 
how would you position your brand? 
More prestigious 
A 
| MagNUM | agen.Dazs 
Lower cost - - 
» Higher cost 
Y 
Less prestigious

Activity 
Look at the diagram below and think about how the ideas of segmentation, 
targeting, and positioning can be used to formulate a marketing strategy. Consider 
products or brands that you are familiar with and complete your own position map. 
Segmentation — | Targeting — 
Positioning — 
Marketing strategy 
In this example, there is no clear answer, but there may be more opportunity to enter 
with a low price, as most competitors are either high or medium priced. Of course, 
high quality and low price is always favorable in the minds of consumers, but is often 
difficult for businesses to achieve, especially in the long term. 
Niche versus mass markets 
Some organizations may have products or services that appeal to a mass market while 
other organizations target a more specific segment of the market, thus exploring and 
creating a niche market. 
Interesting information 
1l 
Do organizations still need to choose between mass and niche markets? 
As new technologies emerge, this is not always clear. In fact, many businesses are 
turning toward mass customization as a production technique (which is discussed 
in Unit 5) and a marketing strategy. By using a mass customization approach, 
organizations can use technologies to communicate with individual customers in 
a customized way on a massive scale. This is possible as companies obtain large 
amounts of consumer data and employ machine learning and algorithms to deliver 
a customized message on a massive scale. For example, personalized advertisements 
appear on a user’s screen based on a recent internet search. 
. 2 
NEWS TODAY 
Vides | World | US & Canads 
ADVIRTISERENT 
el 
Fiber Internet $50/mo 844-534-0535 
42 Santurplink 
This advertisement based on location is an example of mass customization 
Alternatively, a dynamic pricing strategy can be used to charge different prices to 
individual customers depending on how and when they arrive at a company’s website. 
<« Figured.4 Segmentation 
leads to targeting, which leads 
to positioning, which leads to 
marketing strategy 
201

The definition of 'social media’ 
has rapidly changed since the 
term was first used in the mid 
1990s 
202 
Marketing 
When organizations take a mass marketing approach, they try to communicate to the 
largest possible audience. This large audience most likely has a wide range of needs and 
wants. In addition, there are probably many similar products being offered. In a mass 
market approach, there is no attempt to segment the market. Instead, the business 
attempts to reach every potential customer through mass marketing or mass retail. 
Organizations that operate in a mass market tend to focus on quantity rather than 
quality to reach profit targets. 
In contrast, organizations that take a niche marketing approach use segmentation and 
targeting to communicate with small groups of existing or potential customers with 
similar and specific needs and wants. Niche markets tend to be smaller and narrower 
than mass markets. There tends to be less competition. Organizations operating in a 
niche market tend to use specialized processes and, as a result, charge a higher price. 
[nstead of being a small fish in a big pond (a small market share in a large market), 
organizations that take a niche marketing approach strive to be a large fish in a small 
pond (a large market share in a relatively small market). 
Unique selling point/proposition 
Given that most business organizations operate in a competitive environment, they will 
look to separate themselves from their competitors by developing a unique selling point or 
proposition. A unique selling point (USP) is a distinguishing feature of a product or brand. 
A position map can be an effective tool for 
a business to use to identify and develop its USP. 
The USP can come from any of the marketing mix elements (product, price, place, 
promotion, people, physical evidence, or process). Once this USP is identified, a 
business can communicate this feature through promotional materials. In other 
words, it will make a proposition to the customer about why its product or service is 
better than the competition. A USP can become the key factor for a business to use as it 
persuades customers to purchase its product. 
One challenge associated with a USP that many businesses face is how to communicate 
and control the messaging regarding the USP in a consistent manner. Although we will 
cover social media in more detail later in this unit, thinking about social media now 
can provide an interesting perspective on this topic. 
Social media can be defined as any website or application that facilitates the sharing 
of content through virtual networks and communities. Although this is a fast-moving 
industry, Table 4.2 shows some of the top social media tools as of 2022 along with a 
description of their unique selling point. 
Table 4.2 Social media tools and their USPs 
Social media tool 
USP description 
Facebook 
The world’s largest social network 
YouTube 
Interactive video platform giving everyone a voice 
TikTok 
User-generated, short and funny videos 
Instagram 
Building community through visual media 
WeChat 
An innovative, all-in-one chat and social media platform 
WhatsApp 
Worldwide, ad-free instant messaging platform 

Toolkit connection 
Many of the terms, approaches, and activities discussed in this chapter help 
organizations formulate their marketing strategy. In fact, these ideas can be 
connected to the business tool called Porter’s generic strategies. 
Porter’s generic strategies emphasize differentiation. Porter argued that it is difficult 
for a business to be superior in all aspects. Instead, organizations should identify 
what they do best and highlight their unique selling point. 
Porter’s generic strategies also consider focus. Using segmentation and targeting allows a 
business to get to know its market, narrow it down, and meet the needs of its customers. 
Case study - Social enterprises and USPs 
As outlined by the Social Enterprise World Forum (SEWF), a social enterprise: 
One example is Bee's Wrap, which provides a natural alternative to plastic wrap. Its 
is mission focused 
has its surplus (profit) invested in its mission 
has an ownership model tied to its mission with wide community involvement 
is ethically transparent and accountable to its stakeholders 
generates most of its income from the sale of goods and/or services 
has own assets ‘locked’ (if feasible) so that the social enterprise cannot be 
purchased by a private equity firm or taken over by another entity. 
homepage and social media presence highlights its USP. 
Explain the importance of a unique selling point for social enterprises like Bee's Wrap. 
Differentiating from competitors 
There are many ways organizations can differentiate themselves from their 
competitors. Many of these revolve around USPs and the marketing mix, but an 
organization can also differentiate itself by: 
having a unique product feature or range of products to offer (product) 
offering its product for less than the competition (price) 
selling its product in convenient or unique locations (place) 
offering exceptional customer service and developing relationships with its 
customers (people) 
Reflective 
IB learner profile 
Applying for a job or admission 
into a college or university can 
be very competitive. Reflect 
on how you can differentiate 
yourself from other candidates. 
What is your unique selling 
point? 
203

