Trends can be hard to identify. For example, the correlation coefficient of the 
sales data gathered is below 0.5, indicating that the line of best fit may not be an 
accurate model. 
The use of simple linear regression in sales forecasting requires extrapolating 
from historical data, which can be inaccurate. Major problems can occur 
in the future that are not reflected in past sales figures. Any future variations 
in data can be difficult to predict and affect the accuracy of the sales 
forecast. 
4.4 Market research 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* examine why and how organizations carry out market research 
 explain the different methods/techniques of primary and secondary market 
research 
+ explain the difference between qualitative and quantitative research 
« analyze the various methods of sampling. 
Research is a critical skill. Although some research can take place informally and 
happen quite quickly, most worthwhile research follows a systematic process like the 
one outlined in Figure 4.7. 
Four-step research cycle 
Locate and access relevant 
information. 
o Figure4.7 The four-step 
research cycle 
211

Figure4.8 The four-step 
market research cycle 
212 
> 
Marketing 
In this section, you will find that successful organizations complete a similar 
process. Just like schools, colleges, and universities, business organizations must 
be a place of inquiry, where key decision-makers seek knowledge about the market 
in which they operate, then synthesize and evaluate information in a reflective 
manner. 
What is market research? 
Any systematic activity an organization performs to obtain information about a 
particular market is considered market research. This information is often about 
potential and existing customers but can also be about competition and/or the 
market. 
Some questions that can be answered through market research include: 
* What types of products are being sold in a particular market? 
» How much of each product is being sold? 
*  Who is buying the product? 
»  Why are customers buying the product? 
»  Where are customers buying the product? 
* How much would customers pay for a product? 
* How do customers feel about a particular product or brand? 
Research can be done quickly and informally in a business environment. However, 
here we will focus on the systematic process organizations take and the different 
methods they use to obtain the valuable information needed to make decisions, solve 
problems, and reduce risk. 
The activities performed during the market research process are outlined below and 
include identifying, collecting, analyzing, evaluating, and reporting data. 
Four-step market research cycle 
Determine 
what information 
- 
about customers, 
competitors, and/or the 
market 
is needed. 
Gather the information 
through primary and/or 
secondary market research. 

Activity 
As you know from Unit 1, one of the main interests of governments is to stimulate 
business activity and help new businesses to succeed. As a result, government 
agencies often produce guides for entrepreneurs and businesses. For example, the 
Queensland government in Australia has published guidance on market research. 
Research your local government agencies to see what guidance is available for local 
businesses and entrepreneurs regarding market research. 
Why do organizations carry out 
market research? 
The information gathered through the market research process about existing and 
new customers, competitors, and the market in general, helps business owners and 
managers to make informed decisions to achieve organizational objectives, solve 
problems, and reduce risk. 
Market research is helpful and necessary during many business activities, and there are 
connections across the topics in this book. These include: 
» 
Business plans: When starting a business or creating a business plan, market 
research should be performed to assess the current situation of 
a particular 
market. 
« SWOT and STEEPLE analysis: These are two common frameworks that can be 
used to analyze the current overall situation of an organization. Gathering and 
analyzing internal and external factors impacting a business organization often 
starts with market research. 
« 
Sustainability: The United Nations explains the concept of sustainability as 
‘meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs’. Market research can help determine both 
current and future needs, and their current and future impact on local cultures 
and communities, the environment, and the economy. 
» 
Change: Given that businesses operate in a dynamic environment, ongoing 
market research can help organizations stay on top of these changes. 
« 
Decision trees: Creating a decision tree involves calculating chances of success 
and expected values. Market research can help with these calculations. 
» 
Segmentation and target market: Market research can provide insight into 
understanding who your customer is and how to best target that customer. 
» 
Position maps: Market research can help create a position map, which can be used 
to identify any unmet needs or wants (i.e., gaps in the market). 
* 
Product versus market orientation: It is rare for business organizations to take a 
purely product orientation approach. Therefore, gathering some insight into the 
needs and wants of customers is usually a critical component of the marketing 
process. 
Online resources 
Use the QR code here to 
view the guidance on market 
research published by 
Queensland. 
Toolkit connection 
A SWOT analysis is a 
framework for identifying and 
understanding the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats within an 
organization. 
A STEEPLE analysis is another 
framework for analyzing a 
business, taking into account 
the social, technological, 
economics, environmental, 
political, legal, and ethical 
factors. 
213

Given advancements in 
technology, consider the 
following questions: 
+ Can all aspects of the 
market be measured? 
Can companies know 
us better than we know 
ourselves? 
214 
Marketing 
* 
Branding. Brand awareness and value can only be ascertained through market 
research. Furthermore, market research can help determine appropriate strategies 
for brand development. 
* BCG matrix: Creating a BCG matrix requires an understanding of market share and 
the growth rate of a particular market. Market research can help determine both. 
» Marketing mix: This is perhaps the most obvious and most common way to 
use market research. As a business makes decisions about their marketing mix, 
managers can use market research to determine the optimal strategy. In addition, 
market research can help measure the effectiveness of marketing strategies 
already implemented. 
* 
Big data and data mining: As more and more business activity takes place in a 
digital environment, more data can be captured. These data can play a substantial 
role in human resource, operations, and marketing decisions. 
» 
Ethics: With this increased availability of data, privacy and cybersecurity 
issues can arise, requiring business stakeholders to understand these ethical 
implications and act in a responsible manner. 
Quantitative versus qualitative market research 
Organizations can undertake both quantitative and qualitative research. 
Quantitative research involves market research activity that gathers and analyses 
results in the form of numbers (rankings, percentages, etc.). In contrast, qualitative 
research aims to find out people’s attitudes or opinions about something (a product, 
price, customer service, etc.) where the results cannot be shown in numbers. 
To complete a balanced analysis, it is usually wise to include both qualitative and 
quantitative arguments. The same is true for market research. To complete a thorough 
analysis of the market, both qualitative and quantitative research should be used, as 
they are often complementary. For example, qualitative research can be used initially 
to explore the thoughts and opinions of customers within new or existing markets. 
Then, quantitative research can be used to develop specific recommendations (such as 
pricing or promotional strategies) for a particular product. 
As new technologies emerge and as business activity increasingly takes place in 
a digital environment, massive amounts of quantitative data can be gathered by 
business organizations to aid decision-making. Furthermore, this data can be inputted 
into algorithms, and advanced computer technologies like machine learning can be 
used to provide a more customized experience to customers on a massive scale. 
Toolkit connection 
Analyzing qualitative information can be challenging and time-consuming. 
However, statistical tools can be used to analyze quantitative data. These include: 
* 
Measures of central tendency (or averages): The mean, median, and mode of 
data can be calculated. 
* Measures of dispersion: Quartiles and the standard deviation can be calculated. 
 Displays of data: Bar charts, pie charts, and infographics can be created. 
. 
Application of linear regression techniques to create scatterplots and 
analyze bivariate data (data involving two variables).

Although both qualitative and quantitative information can be gathered from all the 
various research methods, some techniques are better than others at gathering certain types 
of data. The different research techniques and their uses are explained in the next section. 
Primary versus secondary market research 
Business organizations use a range of methods when conducting market research. 
These various methods can be put into two categories: primary market research and 
secondary market research. 
Primary market research, also known as field research, involves gathering information 
first-hand to address a specific issue or purpose. Although some larger companies 
can have their own market research departments, many organizations hire external 
suppliers (market research firms) to carry out some or all their market research needs. 
Doing primary market research well requires experience and expertise that many 
organizations might not have. 
Primary market research techniques include: 
« 
Surveys consist of a set of questions given to many people to answer about 
their thoughts, attitudes, preferences, and opinions. These can be done by mail, 
telephone, and online. Surveys can be an excellent way to gather large amounts of 
information from existing or potential customers but can be very challenging to 
design and carry out effectively. 
« 
Interviews involve two people, where the interviewer asks the interviewee 
a series of questions face-to-face, over the phone, or virtually. These can be 
quite structured, where the interviewee prepares and asks only predetermined 
questions, though are often more useful when the interviewee asks more detailed, 
follow-up questions. Interviews can be an effective way to gather detailed 
information from key stakeholders but can be quite time-consuming. 
» 
Focus groups consist of bringing a group of customers together to discuss 
feelings, perceptions, opinions, and general feedback about products, price, 
advertisements, brand, and more. Like interviews, they can provide detailed and 
immediate information allowing the business to clarify any potential issues or 
problems. On the other hand, these can be hard to set up, control and manage. 
Furthermore, the small number of consumers gathered may not fully represent 
the target market. 
« Observations consist of an observer gathering information by carefully 
watching and trying to understand certain behaviors of potential or existing 
customers. For example, a retailer may track how individuals navigate a store 
and observe how the traffic flow or store displays impact purchases. This can be 
done in a digital environment too, where analytics like the navigation or clicks of 
a web page can be gathered automatically. Observations can be a cost-effective 
way to gather market research during the business activity (rather than before 
or afterwards). However, observations alone rarely yield underlying attitudes or 
opinions of individuals. 
Secondary market research, or desk research, refers to the collection and analysis 
of information that already exists (i.e., secondhand data). This information was 
previously gathered for other purposes but can be useful for organizations to solve 
their own problems and make decisions. 
Focus groups can help 
companies look past data and 
understand their customers 
better 
215

Some companies use 
the massive amount of 
information gathered 
through social media 
platforms, mabile apps, 
video platforms, and search 
engines for market research. 
Logging this kind of data 
and employing machine 
learning allows companies 
to provide customized 
advertising. For example, 
if you search for a new 
backpack, the next day you 
may see advertisements 
for backpacks on unrelated 
web pages. 
Native advertising (placing 
advertisements strategically 
within online content) can 
be used to blur the lines 
between advertisements 
and content, increasing 
the likelihood of the 
user engaging with the 
advertisement. 
Marketing 
Secondary market research consists of: 
» Market analyses: Studies, market intelligence, and reports are often published by 
specialist organizations (such as Mintel) to provide information about consumers, 
products, competitors, and other detailed information about a market. Although 
these can be available through libraries and databases, they can be expensive. 
Academic journals: These too are often available through libraries and 
databases, and are a collection of articles produced by experts published 
periodically throughout the year. University professors, graduate students, and 
others contribute their first-hand research, knowledge, and experience related to 
their field of expertise in the world of business. The Journal of International Business 
Studies is an academic journal that businesses can use to gain knowledge on all 
aspects of international business. 
Government publications: Local, regional, and national governments gather 
data and produce reports on a wide range of business-related issues. These can 
provide businesses with helpful information on various markets operating within 
their region, economic data, demographic or census data, and consumer and 
social trends. 
Media articles: These include newspaper and magazine business articles. Many 
are available online free, although some require a small subscription fee. Some 
news agencies like the BBC can have a dedicated section and team of writers and 
editors to capture the latest business and market news, while others can specialize 
in a specific aspect of business. For example, Entrepreneur magazine focuses on 
small businesses. 
Online content: The internet provides entrepreneurs and businesses access to 
massive amounts of market-related information, many of which are high-quality 
Table 4.4 The advantages and disadvantages of primary and secondary market research 
Primary market research 
Secondary market research 
. 
Secondary market research can be an effective way 
Primary market research allows an 
: 
: 
; 
Relevance and 
Lo 
for a business to get a quick overview of a market. 
organization to gather up-to-date 
. 
, 
accuracy 
) 
) 
. 
. 
i 
However, it can be outdated, poor quality, and not 
information that is specific to its needs. 
p 
s 
specific to the organization’s needs. 
All the primary market research techniques 
) 
) 
i 
. 
P 
Y . 
i 
) q 
Secondary market research gathers information 
Time 
require preparation, and this can be time- 
: 
] 
already collected and can be done very quickly. 
consuming. 
Primary market research can be very difficult | Although effective research skills are needed, 
Difficulty 
for an entrepreneur or business to do well. In | secondary market research can usually be done 
many cases, an outside expert is hired. 
quite easily. 
. 
Many are free or inexpensive, although market 
Primary market research can be very 
| 
; 
e 
Cost 
‘ 
reports, and some higher quality publications can 
expensive to conduct well. 
be costly. 
Although surveys and observations can 
e 
A 
Government publications and market reports often 
generate quantitative data, other forms of 
) 
T 
) 
. 
i 
‘ 
contain large amounts of quantitative data but, in 
Type of data 
primary market research (like interviews or 
: 
o 
general, secondary market research provides both 
focus groups) tend to capture qualitative data 
. 
o 
g 
i 
; 
qualitative and quantitative data. 
such as feelings, opinions, and emotions. 
216

multimedia like videos and podcasts. However, the source of such information 
should always be carefully evaluated. Internet searches and social media platforms 
often rely on algorithms to maximize attention, which can make it more difficult 
to find high-quality, relevant information with opposing viewpoints. 
Interesting information 
l 
Primary and secondary research consider how the information is gathered. 
Another strategy that you can use when evaluating information is to consider who 
is the source of that information. To do this, we can apply the terms primary and 
secondary sources that are commonly used in disciplines like history, literature, and 
law to the world of business. 
Primary sources provide a first-hand account of an event or time period. Primary 
sources are considered to be a reliable source of information because they give 
direct, first-hand evidence (though they may still contain their own biases). In 
business, primary sources would come from a business itself in the form of annual 
reports, financial statements, press releases, interviews, speeches, company 
documents or websites, and social media posts. 
In contrast, secondary sources do not give original information. They are created 
by someone not present at the event they are writing about and often involve 
synthesis, interpretation, and analysis. In business, this comes from sources outside 
the organization itself and includes articles from newspapers, magazines, and trade 
publications. 
Which do you think is more valid? What biases do these sources have? How does 
: 
. 
i 
: 
: 
IB learner profile 
knowing where the information comes from affect your own arguments, analysis, 
and judgments? What other information about the source should you consider? 
Thinkers, Inquirers 
Although these are hard 
questions to answer, thinking 
critically about the source of 
important research skill to use 
in this course, in many of your 
other courses, and in life. 
Look at this collection of videos from Stanford University, 
which aims to help all citizens become smarter and better 
informed. 
After watching at least one video in the collection, create a list 
of tips to share with your classmates on how to become a 
better researcher. 
Limitations of market research 
As discussed, market research can play a key role in helping organizations make 
informed decisions. Gathering and analyzing both qualitative and quantitative data 
using both primary and secondary market research techniques can provide decision- 
makers with a balanced and comprehensive understanding of the market in which they 
operate. 
However, there are some limitations to market research. One way to understand these 
limitations is by applying the business concepts of change, ethics, and sustainability. 
217

To what extent is market 
research dependent on 
knowledge of the past and 
to what extent is it about 
knowledge that tries to 
predict the future? Is one 
more prevalent than the 
other? 
How might the language 
used in focus groups, 
interviews and surveys 
influence the conclusions 
that are reached? 
Is it possible to eliminate 
the effect of researcher 
bias when conducting 
market research? 
Do random number 
generators produce 
random numbers? 
Most do not produce 
truly random numbers. 
Most random number 
generators use algorithms 
to generate pseudo 
random numbers. These 
generators rely an 
mathematical formulae or 
precalculated lists, which 
can be repeated. These 
generators are quite good 
at mimicking the selection 
of 
a random number, 
which means they are 
more than sufficient for 
random sarmpling. 
There are many random 
number generators 
available online, such as 
this one: 
Marketing 
Change 
Businesses operate in a dynamic environment where new competition, technologies, 
markets, and consumer tastes and behaviors are constantly emerging. Therefore, any 
analysis of data must acknowledge the temporary nature of the market and the need 
for market research to be an ongoing process. 
Ethics 
New technologies and the increasing amount of digital business activity brings large 
amounts of data and opportunity to market researchers to maximize profit. However, 
it also brings concerns of data privacy and security to the fore. Just like many, if 
not all aspects of a business activity, the ethical implications and perspectives of all 
stakeholders need to be considered throughout the market research process. 
Sustainability 
Market research is a key ingredient to reducing risk and business success, especially 
for new businesses and entrepreneurs. At the same time, market research can be quite 
costly and time-consuming. Therefore, a balance between the benefits and costs of 
market research must be carefully managed for a business to survive and thrive into 
the future. 
In the next section of this unit, we investigate how sampling can be used when 
conducting primary market research to address at least one of these limitations. 
Sampling methods 
You may recall the term ‘sample’ from science or mathematics classes when gathering 
and analyzing data (for example, a cell sample). Or maybe you are familiar with 
‘sample’ in relation to food (free samples). One is certainly more enjoyable than the 
other, but in both situations, the word sample represents a portion or small amount of 
the whole. 
In business, market researchers can use sampling when conducting primary market 
research. More data is usually better, but this is not always realistic. It is often difficult, 
if not impossible, to gather data from every customer or member of the target 
population. This is where sampling, or contacting only a small, representative group of 
customers, can be a powerful way for researchers to recognize and generalize patterns 
and trends. 
Gathering a representative sample is not easy, and there are several different methods 
market researchers can use. 
« Random sampling is when every member of the population has an equal chance 
of being included in the sample. A purely random sample is often hard to achieve 
but can produce the most fair and unbiased results. One way market researchers 
can achieve random sampling is to assign each member of the target population a 
number and then use a random number generator to select the sample. 
* Quota sampling is when a market is divided into different groups (e.g., by 
age, gender, geographic region) and then a sample is taken from each group to 
represent the total market. For example, let’s say a university wants to survey their 
students about campus security. Since it has both graduate and undergraduate

students, it wants to gather a representative sample from both groups. Therefore, 
the market researcher sets a quota for each group. This quota is often set to 
obtain proportional representation. In this case, the researcher bases the quota 
on current enrollment numbers (e.g., 4,000 or 40 per cent graduate students 
and 6,000 or 60 per cent undergraduate students) and collects surveys from 
20 graduate students and 30 undergraduate students. The 20 graduate and 
30 undergraduate students can then be selected randomly or in a non-random 
way (such as by using convenience sampling). 
+ Convenience sampling is a popular, non-random method used by market 
researchers when faced with time and cost constraints. In this method, 
individuals are selected based on their availability (such as the first 100 people 
to enter a store). Of all the sampling methods, convenience sampling can lead to 
the most inaccurate and biased results, as the most available customers would 
most likely not represent all customers accurately. Therefore, organizations 
should resist making any significant generalizations based on convenience 
sampling data. 
Activity 
One way to develop and practice your understanding for this topic (and many 
others) is to consider the perspective of different stakeholder groups. 
To help develop your understanding of market research, complete the following 
tasks. 
1 
Brainstorm a list of different perspectives (i.e., stakeholder groups) that would be 
interested in market research. Revisit your notes or the section on stakeholders 
(section 1.4) as necessary. 
2 Choose one perspective (stakeholder group) and think about and investigate 
market research from their viewpoint. 
3 Summarize your thoughts and findings by completing the following sentences: 
I'am thinking of market research from the viewpoint of 
. [Insert the 
stakeholder group you've chosen.] 
[ think 
. [Describe the topic from your selected stakeholder. 
Be an actor 
— take on the character of your viewpoint. 
] 
A question I have from this viewpoint is 
.[Ask a question 
from this viewpoint.] 
Practice questions 
Taxi-M (TM) operates 2,500 taxis in a developing 
country. All drivers are full-time employees and 
have a professional taxi license. Although it's 
not compulsory, TM regularly conducts safety 
inspections of the taxis. Though they are safe, most 
of TM's taxis are old and TM charges high prices. 
Many customers complain. 
error and bias when 
How might a company 
protect against sample 
designing primary market 
research? 
IB learner profile 
Caring 
Which sampling method 
could be used to best serve 
underrepresented communities 
or groups of people? 
219

