Marketing 
In addition, TM is facing competition from a new service. A multinational company, 
RE, with offices around the world, has designed an advanced mobile application 
(app) called Best-Taxi (BT), which helps reduce its operational costs. Using their 
mobile phones, passengers can use BT to book and pay for a car journey. Any car 
owner can offer journeys through BT. For security reasons, the BT app registers 
passengers’ and drivers’ personal details. 
TM'’s sales are falling, and profits are down. Several TM drivers are becoming 
demotivated. Facing lower incomes, poor management, and rumors of 
redundancies, many loyal drivers have left to offer taxi services using their own 
cars and the BT app. Some of these drivers are earning considerably higher wages 
than before. 
The situation for TM appeared critical. However, the local media has reported a 
higher rate of road accidents for BT drivers than licensed taxi drivers. Several of BT’s 
drivers have assaulted and robbed customers. Primary market research conducted 
by TM using focus groups revealed that some of their customers thought BT and 
TM were the same company. 
In response, TM’s management decided to downsize and differentiate itself from BT 
by positioning its service as a high-price, high-quality, traditional taxi service. TM 
will: 
* sellits older cars and lease new luxury cars 
* develop a unique selling point/proposition (USP) emphasizing comfort and safety. 
Customers will be able to book TM taxis by telephone and by stopping them in 
the street. TM's target market will be businesspeople, higher-income families, and 
passengers concerned about safety. 
1 Explain one benefit and one limitation for TM of using focus groups. 
(4 marks) 
2 Explain two sampling methods TM could use to conduct further 
primary market research. 
(4 marks) 
4.5 The seven Ps of the marketing mix 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Product 
* 
explain the relationship between the product life cycle, product portfolio and 
the marketing mix 
* 
recommend extension strategies 
* 
explain the relationship between the product life cycle, investment, profit, and 
cash flow 
* 
explain the following aspects of branding: awareness, loyalty, development, and 
value 
* 
explain the value of branding 
220

Price 
+ 
evaluate the appropriateness of the following pricing methods: 
o cost-plus (mark-up) pricing, penetration pricing, loss leader, predatory 
pricing, premium pricing 
o 
dynamic pricing, competitive pricing, contribution pricing, price 
elasticity of demand 
Promotion 
+ 
explain the following aspects of promotion: above-the-line, below-the-line, and 
through-the-line 
+ discuss social media marketing as a promotional strategy 
Place 
* discuss the importance of different types of distribution channels 
People 
» discuss the importance of employee—customer relationships in marketing a 
service and cultural variation in these relationships 
Process 
* 
discuss the importance of delivery processes in marketing a service and changes 
in these processes 
Physical evidence 
» 
discuss the importance of tangible physical evidence in marketing a service 
+ recommend appropriate marketing mixes for products or businesses. 
Although the marketing mix has been introduced previously, this section explores the 
7Ps of the marketing mix in more depth. The first four Ps of the marketing mix apply 
to all business organizations: 
« Product is a good or service that a business sells to its customers. 
* 
Price is the amount a business charges its customers in exchange for the product. 
« Promotion is when a business informs people about products and attempts to 
persuade them to buy its product. 
* 
Place is the process of getting products from the business to its customer (i.e., 
distribution), ensuring that goods and services are available where and when they 
are required. 
Three additional elements of the marketing mix are most applicable to organizations 
involved in the service industry: 
« People involves the skills, attitudes, knowledge, and appearance of employees 
and the interaction and relationships between key stakeholders (e.g., customers 
and employees). 
* Process is the way in which the service is ordered, received, and paid for by the 
customer. 
» 
Physical evidence is the tangible aspects or physical environment of the 
business in which the customers and employees interact. 
221

"Il 
Marketing 
Figure4.9 The7Psofthe pp 
marketing mix must be used 
together in a strategic fashion, 
just like the ingredients of a 
cake 
Marketing mix 
Although we will explore each of these elements separately in depth, it is important to 
recognize how these elements work together. Much like the ingredients in a cake (flour, 
butter, sugar, etc.), the marketing mix elements are the ingredients businesses use to 
develop an effective marketing strategy (to meet the needs and wants of its customers). 
The marketing mix elements must be used in a strategic manner, working together and 
not against each other for them to be effective. For example, a business that develops 
a luxury product will usually want to set a high price and make it available at an 
appropriate, high-end retailer. 
Product 
Most businesses start with a product, an idea for a good or service that will satisfy 
a certain need or want within the market. Previously discussed ideas like market 
orientation, market research, segmentation, targeting, and positioning can all help a 
business decide on what type of product to sell. Another way to analyze this critical 
element of the marketing mix and formulate appropriate marketing strategies is 
through the product life cycle. 
A product life cycle charts the progression of a product’s sales over its lifetime and 
divides the life of the product into four distinct stages: introduction, growth, maturity, 
and decline. Figure 4.10 shows the typical product life cycle and these four distinct 
stages. 
During the introduction stage, the product experiences slow sales growth as it 
becomes known in the market. The business typically spends heavily during this phase 
to get the business running. For example, capital expenditures like manufacturing 
equipment and revenue expenditures like employees’ wages and promotional 
materials may be needed. The average cost per customer is usually quite high during 
the introduction stage. Businesses often lose money during this phase (i.e., profits are 
zero) and experience poor cash flow (i.e., outflows are usually much more than any 
inflows). 
222

Product life cycle 
Maturity 
Growth 
Decline 
Sales 
Introduction 
Time 
During the growth stage, sales rapidly increase as the product becomes more well- 
known and desired by its customers, as the promotional strategies start producing 
results. Profits also increase during this period and this can be followed by positive 
cash flow. 
Eventually, most products will hit the maturity stage and experience a slowdown in 
sales growth as the product has already reached most of its potential customers. Profits 
begin to stabilize during this period or even decrease due to the reduction in sales 
and increase in other similar products coming onto the market. Cash flow can remain 
strong during this phase but will often show some signs that it too will eventually 
decrease, as the cash payments from sales start to decline. 
Lastly, the decline stage signals a downward trend in sales, and profits continue to 
further decline. Cash flow too starts becoming a problem, and the business will most 
likely begin phasing out the product. 
A summary of the product life cycle characteristics, objectives, and strategies 
inspired by Philip Kotler in his textbook called Marketing Management is shown in 
Table 4.5. 
Once the life cycle phase is determined, the information in Table 4.5 can be a helpful 
way for organizations to formulate relevant marketing objectives and strategies for 
a particular product. However, there are some disadvantages to using the product 
life cycle. It is not always clear which phase the product is in. As we discussed in 4.3 
Sales forecasting, there can be significant variation in sales data, making it difficult 
to identify trends. There can be many ups and downs in the life of 
a product when it 
comes to its sales, and the duration of the stages can vary widely. 
To manage this uncertainty, many organizations choose to sell multiple products. A 
business’ range of products is called its product portfolio. Ideally, an organization that 
sells multiple products will have products at multiple stages in its life cycle. This will 
allow it to spread out the amount of investment needed and balance out any cash flow 
problems. 
<« Figure4.10 The four stages 
of the product life cycle 
223

Marketing 
Table 4.5 Product life cycle characteristics, objectives, and strategies 
Introduction 
Growth 
Maturity 
Decline 
Sales 
Low 
Rapidly increasing | Peak 
Decreasing 
Investment 
High 
Average 
Low 
Very low 
" 
(costs) 
Characteristics 
Profits 
Negative (none) | Rising 
High 
Decreasing 
Cash flow 
Problems 
Becoming positive | Strong 
Decreasing 
Competitors 
Few 
Growing 
Stable 
Decreasing 
. 
Product 
Maximize market 
Maximize 
Reduce 
Objectives 
. 
awareness 
share 
profits 
expenditure 
: 
. 
Additional 
Phase out 
Improving quality 
. 
, 
‘ 
extension 
Product 
Basic product 
and extension 
: 
, 
strategies, 
strategies 
e 
diversify 
Competitive 
Cut prices, loss 
A 
Penetration and 
P 
P 
Price 
Cost-plus 
. 
- 
and predatory | leader 
. 
competitive pricing 
- 
Strategies 
pricing 
Additional 
Phase out 
Selective 
Multiple distribution 
|, 
Place 
R 
distribution 
distribution 
channels 
channels 
Product 
Awareness and 
USP, new 
Reduce 
Promotion 
awareness and | interest in the mass | market 
entice trial 
market 
segments 
224 
Toolkit connection 
The Boston Consulting Group matrix enables firms to classify their products 
according to two key variables (relative market share and market growth), resulting 
in four categories. 
High 
A 
Market growth rate 
The four categories of the Boston Consulting Group matrix 
Relative market share 
High <€ 
> Low 
Stars 
? 
Question marks 
Dogs 

In addition to the product life cycle, the Boston Consulting Group matrix can 
be used to evaluate its product portfolio and determine appropriate marketing 
strategies. These strategies and the connection to the product life cycle are 
summarized in the table. 
Product life 
cycle stage 
BCG matrix 
Marketing strategy 
Introduction | Question marks | High level of investment to BUILD product 
awareness 
Growth 
Star 
Maximize and HOLD market share 
developing awareness and interest of the 
mass market 
Maturity 
Cash cow 
Maximize and HARVEST profits 
developing brand loyalty and value using 
competitive pricing 
Decline 
Dog 
DIVEST, phasing out product and 
investment 
After an organization classifies and plots its various products in the BCG matrix, 
it must determine whether its portfolio is healthy. An unbalanced portfolio would 
have too many dogs or question marks and too few stars and cash cows. 
Activity 
B-Pharma, a public limited company, is one of the biggest multinational companies 
(MNCs) in the pharmaceutical industry. It employs over 30,000 people globally. The 
corporate headquarters are in Tsukuba Science City, Japan. 
B-Pharma sells a wide range of prescription drugs to its customers. Three of its 
products are: 
* Pharmax, a painkiller and B-Pharma’s bestselling drug. It has a share of 
around one-third of the market in Japan and the U.S.A. That figure has been 
stable for the past ten years. Although the market is saturated and growing 
very slowly, this painkiller is a well-established product. Following the 
expiration of the original patent, competitors are now starting to produce 
cheaper substitutes. 
* 
Pharmaflo, a drug that prevents heart attacks. Launched eight years ago, it has a 
15 per cent market share in a rapidly growing market. 
* Pharmaslim, a drug for weight control. It is selling poorly, even though the 
market for anti-obesity drugs is growing rapidly. 
Applying the BCG matrix, analyze B-Pharma’s current portfolio of products. 
225

Marketing 
Figure4.11 The product pp 
life cycle with multiple 
extension strategies 
Sales () 
Time 
Extension strategies 
As shown in Table 4.5, extension strategies can be used to prolong the life cycle of a 
product. During the maturity and growth stages, the business experiences increasing 
profits and strong cash flow, which are attractive to a business. Therefore, a business will 
look to do what it can to keep its products in these stages. In some cases, multiple extension 
strategies can be used over time to create a cyclical nature to the product life cycle. 
Extension strategies include: 
» making cosmetic changes to the product, shape, name, color, or packaging 
* bringing out new product variants by adding a new feature or reformulating the 
product — in some cases, a new use for the product can be found 
* 
designing a new advertising or promotional campaign 
* lowering the price 
* adding more effective distribution channels 
* 
finding new customers (market segments). For example, a business can expand 
into new geographic markets. 
Figure 4.11 shows the possible effects of these on product sales. 
Extension strategies can also be used in the early stages of the decline phase. However, 
this can often be too late, as the product is simply no longer 
in demand. Changes 
in technology or consumer tastes can make the product obsolete and require most 
businesses to begin phasing out the product once the decline stage is reached. 
Toolkit connection 
Product life extension models are one of the circular business models included in 
the business management toolkit. Businesses that use this model extend the use 
period of existing products, slow the flow of constituent materials through the 
economy, and reduce the rate of resource extraction and waste generation. 
One example of a company dedicated to this model is Trove. In their own words, 
Trove ‘extends the life of millions of products’ by providing ‘the technology, 
operations, and analytics enabling retailers to stand up a scalable and profitable 
branded recommerce channel’. 
Another organization, Bundles, offers appliances, such as washing machines, on a 
pay-per-use basis while maintaining and refurbishing to preserve the product for 
multiple cycles. 
226

Research the different production models of four or five businesses. What are the 
differences between the traditional production model (extraction of materials, 
adding value, selling, use, then disposal) and a circular business model (reuse, 
recycle, repurpose)? 
Branding 
A brand is an identifying name, symbol, image, or trademark, which enables a product 
to be easily recognized and distinguished from its competitors. However, many people 
in marketing would argue that a brand is much more than a symbol or logo. For 
example, marketing author Seth Godin defines a brand in this way: 
A brand is the set of expectations, memories, stories and relationships that, 
taken together, account for a consumer’s decision to choose one product or 
service over another. If the consumer (whether it's a business, a buyer, a voter or 
a donor) doesn’t pay a premium, make a selection or spread the word, then no 
brand value exists for that consumer. 
- &5 
ADVERTISING 
MARKETING 
Depending on the life cycle stage of 
a product, an organization will want to focus on 
one of the following aspects of branding: 
» Brand awareness: This usually takes place in the early stages of the life cycle 
(introduction) of 
a product. Brand awareness is the extent to which the brand 
is recognized and correctly associated with a particular product. To build 
brand awareness, promotion is focused on informing customers and potential 
customers that the product exists. 
 Brand loyalty: This usually takes place during the middle stages of the life cycle 
(growth and maturity) of 
a product, as businesses face increasing competition. 
Brand loyalty is the extent of faithfulness of customers to a particular brand even 
when alternative products or companies exist. Brand loyalty aims to attract repeat 
customers or customers to purchase related products. 
227

Some companies 
maintain a multi-brand 
strategy. Here are two 
examples that you may be 
familiar with: 
= Unilever is a British 
multinational company 
that maintains several 
large brands including 
three ice cream brands: 
Breyers, Magnum, and 
Ben & Jerry's. 
« Facebook (Meta) 
started as a single app, 
but now offers a suite 
of products including 
Facebook, Instagram, 
WhatsApp, and Oculus. 
What would be the 
advantages and 
disadvantages of a 
multi-brand strategy? 
In contrast, other 
organizations choose 
to maintain a single 
company-wide brand for 
a variety of product lines. 
Some examples include 
Ralph Lauren (with 
fashion and homeware 
products) and Samsung 
(with electronics, 
appliances, life insurance, 
hospitals, and even theme 
parks). 
What would be the 
advantages and 
disadvantages of this 
approach? 
228 
Marketing 
* Brand development: This is the process of building brand awareness. It can also 
take place in the later stages of the life cycle. Changing the brand over time can 
help maintain its popularity. Developing the brand can involve the following steps: 
o reviewing the overall business or marketing strategy 
o identifying the target market 
o conducting market research 
o identifying and developing the unique selling point (USP) 
o adjusting the marketing mix. 
Another aspect of brand development activity can involve the promotion of a 
firm'’s corporate social responsibility and ethical values. 
* Brand value: As discussed in Unit 3, the brand value estimates how much a 
brand is worth in terms of income, potential income, reputation, prestige, and 
market value. Coming up with a value of this intangible asset is important when 
one business is acquiring another. The acquiring company often pays more than 
the value of the net assets and this difference between the purchase price and net 
assets is recorded in the form of goodwill. 
Branding can be very important to any business but is especially important for 
businesses facing strong competition, when customers have multiple options to 
choose between. The brand should be one of the first considerations when a business 
designs its promotional strategies. It is a key factor in identifying an organization’s 
USP, differentiating it from competition, and formulating a cohesive marketing 
strategy. Customers now have a strong voice via social media, so it is not always 
easy to control and develop a brand. A business will need to invest heavily during 
the initial stages to develop a positive and strong brand. During the middle to later 
stages, this strong brand will need to be maintained to persuade customers to make 
repeat purchases and remain loyal. Creating a brand often requires a whole business 
approach. Having a clear and simple brand is often the key to business success. 
Toolkit connection 
Packaging can play a key role in the product, brand, and marketing mix. One 
company that has made packaging its business is Ecovative Design. It has pioneered 
the use of mycelium to replace Styrofoam and other plastics in packaging and 
provide sustainable alternatives to leather and animal agriculture. 
Price 
The pricing strategies that businesses use can fit into three categories: cost-based, 
market-based, and competition-based. Each category has its own advantages and 
disadvantages. A business may choose to use one or a combination of these pricing 
strategies. 
Cost-based pricing 
Perhaps the most simple and common way for an organization to set prices is to use a 
cost-plus (or mark-up) pricing strategy. In this strategy, the total cost of production 
per unit is determined and then a percentage mark-up is added to obtain the selling 
price. When using the cost-plus pricing strategy, the total cost of production includes

Pricing strategies 
| 
| 
g 
| 
p' 
5, 
P 
B, 
Cost-based 
Market-based 
Competition- 
based 
‘. 
| 
A 
L 
| 
- 
A 
| 
’y 
P 
I 
B 
™\ 
@ 
b 
Cost-plus 
Penetration 
. 
(mark-up) pricing 
pricing 
Fredatory pricing 
| 
/N 
| 
_ 
S 
| 
/ 
N 
R, 
@ 
B, 
Sl 
Loss 
lead 
Premium pricin 
pricing (HL) 
O 
At 
[ 
P 
g 
" 
B 
b 
& 
. 
4 
P 
| 
™\ 
IS 
| 
B, 
Dynamic pricing 
Competitive pricing 
(HL) 
(HL) 
- 
| 
> 
g 
g/ 
~ 
Price elasticity of 
demand (HL) 
. 
/ 
both the direct costs and an allocated portion of the indirect costs. For example, a 
t-shirt business determines the cost of making a t-shirt is $10. The business can decide 
on a 50 per cent mark-up. This results in a selling price of $15 ($10 + (0.5 x $10)). 
A cost-plus pricing strategy ensures that a certain percentage of profit will be made 
on selling the product, as the price will exceed all costs associated with that product. 
This can help ensure the long-term survival of the business. This strategy is also quite 
flexible, as the mark-up percentage can be quickly adjusted. This will allow a business 
the ability to respond to any changes (such as economic downturn or increased 
competition). However, the cost-plus pricing method relies on a business being able to 
manage their costs. Small businesses may not be able to take advantage of economies 
of scale, and as a result, using a cost-based pricing strategy may result in too high of a 
price compared to their competitors. In addition, obtaining the total costs (direct and 
indirect costs) to allocate to a single product can be challenging. 
Contribution pricing 
In a contribution pricing strategy, the price is based on the direct (or variable) costs 
of manufacturing only, along with some mark-up. This differs from cost-plus pricing, 
which considers both direct and indirect costs. The amount of mark-up in contribution 
pricing represents how much that product contributes to the overhead or fixed costs. 
Returning to our t-shirt example, let’s say that the variable costs per unit (e.g., raw 
materials) is $7. If the business sells the t-shirt for $15, then for every t-shirt sold, $8 (or 
$15 — $7) contributes to covering the fixed costs (e.g., rent). Further calculations can be 
made. For example, if fixed costs total $800, then we can calculate how many t-shirts 
we need to sell to break even or cover our fixed costs by dividing our fixed costs by the 
unit contribution ($800/$8 = 100 t-shirts). 
« Figure4.12 Pricing 
strategies 
229

230 
Marketing 
Contribution will be explained in more detail 
in Unit 5; however, it can be best understood 
as the total revenue minus total variable 
costs. Contribution can be calculated per 
unit (unit contribution) by subtracting the 
variable cost per unit from the price. In short, 
contribution indicates how much each product 
(or department) contributes to the overheads of 
a business. 
Contribution pricing avoids complex 
calculations needed in cost-plus pricing as only 
the variable costs of manufacturing is needed. However, this strategy may still result 
in too high of a price for small businesses that cannot take advantage of economies 
of scale. 
Market-based pricing 
Market-based pricing strategies consider market factors such as customer demand or 
the level of demand in the market. 
A penetration pricing strategy is when a business sets a low price to increase market 
share. Businesses often turn to this strategy when launching a product in a new market 
to build awareness. This can also be used effectively for products operating within a 
mass market, as the high sales volume will help offset the low profit margins. Setting 
a low price using the penetration pricing strategy attracts customers and, eventually, 
once the brand is established, prices can be increased. 
Aloss leader pricing strategy also involves setting a low price to attract customers. 
When a business uses this pricing strategy, the business sells a product or products 
below the unit cost (at a loss). This means that loss leader prices are often even lower 
than penetration prices. This approach can increase awareness, lead to higher market 
share, and encourage customers to purchase other products. Supermarkets and giant 
retail stores often use this strategy, as they can offer other products at a higher price to 
offset the low price on the loss leader product(s). Total sales often increase using both 
strategies; however, profit margins will decrease. 
Dynamic pricing 
A dynamic pricing strategy involves changing the price of 
a good or service according 
to the demand. Dynamic pricing is sometimes called ‘surge pricing’ (as prices go 
up when and where a surge in demand occurs) or ‘time-based pricing’ (as prices 
change according to the time of day or year). Airlines are known to use this pricing 
strategy, charging a higher price around the holiday season. In addition, airline 
prices can fluctuate around the work week with lower prices generally occurring 
during the middle of the week (Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday). Other examples 
of businesses that use a dynamic pricing strategy include ride-sharing companies

like Uber and companies providing utilities like electricity and water. This strategy 
provides businesses with greater control and flexibility when setting prices but it can 
be challenging for organizations to determine the optimal price at any given time, as it 
relies on gathering large amounts of data and the use of algorithms. 
Price elasticity of demand 
Typically, as prices rise, demand for a product decreases. Similarly, as prices drop, 
demand for a product increases. The price elasticity of demand measures how much 
the demand for a product changes in relation to changes in price. It is calculated using 
this formula: 
% change in quantity demanded 
Price elasticity of demand (PED) = 
% change in price 
If the PED is between 0 and 1, then demand is inelastic, meaning that the quantity 
demanded does not change much as prices change. In other words, the quantity 
demanded does not respond that much to a change in price, which reveals that 
customers are not very sensitive to changes in price. A business can charge a higher 
price for products with inelastic demand, because the number of customers will not 
decrease that much and higher profits can be earned. 
If the PED is greater than 1, demand is elastic. As prices change, the quantity demanded 
changes quite a lot (customers are price sensitive). In fact, the quantity demanded 
changes proportionately more than the change in the price. A business should charge a 
lower price for products with elastic demand, because the number of customers would 
increase a lot and offset the lower profit margins. 
In theory, a PED equal to 1 is the optimal price and is called unit elastic. At this price 
point, revenue would be maximized and any change in the price would resultin a 
proportional change in demand. 
Returning to our t-shirt example, if we increase our price by 10 per cent, and the 
quantity demanded decreases by 25 per cent, then the price elasticity of demand can be 
calculated as follows: 
% change in quantity demanded _ 25% = 2.5 
% change in price 
10% 
Price elasticity of demand (PED) = 
Therefore, we can say that the demand of t-shirts is elastic. The business should 
consider lowering the price rather than raising it. 
In contrast, necessities tend to be inelastic in demand, because consumers would still 
need to buy products like petrol, salt, and utilities. Inelastic goods will be needed no 
matter the price and few substitutes exist. Why do businesses not charge high prices 
for necessities if demand is inelastic, and consumers are not too sensitive to changes 
in price? Consumers still have a choice: if petrol becomes too expensive, consumers 
might create carpools and share expenses, or use a bicycle instead. Another reason for 
not charging extremely high prices is that governments usually have some controls 
in place for necessities to ensure that people can afford to meet their basic needs. 
Governments may subsidize certain businesses (such as those providing energy or 
food) to ensure that prices will not rise more than consumers can afford. 
231

232 
Marketing 
Table 4.6 Inelastic and elastic demand 
When this occurs 
Recommended strategy 
Inelastic 
0<PED <1 
Increase prices 
Elastic 
PED > 1 
Decrease prices 
Competition-based pricing 
Business organizations that use a competition-based pricing strategy start by looking 
at their competitor’s prices. 
A predatory pricing strategy is when a business sets its price low to eliminate 
competitors from the market or prevent new competitors from entering the market. 
Although difficult to prove and enforce, this strategy is illegal in many countries. The 
anti-competitive nature of this approach raises ethical considerations. Like other prices 
that involve setting low prices, this strategy can build awareness, attract customers, 
and increase sales in the short term. However, this approach cannot be used for long, 
as profit margins will be slim. Furthermore, setting low prices may weaken the brand 
and not align with the overall marketing plan of the business. 
A premium pricing strategy occurs when a business inflates its prices to enhance 
brand value. Businesses that use this strategy are hoping to create the impression 
that their products are of higher quality or value than their lower-cost equivalents. If 
successful, business organizations that use this strategy can enjoy high profit margins. 
However, this may be difficult and costly to maintain, as high levels of promotion 
and/or customer service are needed to fend off competition. In addition, the higher 
prices may reduce the pool of potential customers and target those customers seeking 
a luxury product. 
Competitive pricing 
When a business bases the price for its goods or services on what its competitors are 
charging for similar goods and services, it has three options. It can charge less than 
the competition, as in the predatory pricing strategy. It can charge more than the 
competition, as in the premium pricing strategy. Or 
it can charge the same amount as 
the competition.

Which one a business chooses depends on several factors and, as with all pricing 
strategies, the entire marketing mix should be considered. For example, a business 
that sets a price equal to its competitors will want to differentiate itself in other ways, 
perhaps by promoting social objectives. 
A business might not always know what its competitors are charging. One way to 
address this limitation is to offer a price match, in which the business provides the 
same price as a competitor when presented with evidence from the customer. 
Table 4.7 Low price tactics and high price strategies 
Low price tactic 
Price variation options 
High price strategy 
Examples 
* 
Penetration 
Although cost-plus and 
* Premium 
e 
Loss leader 
contribution pricing vary 
« 
Predatory 
according to the mark-up, 
these strategies usually set 
the minimum acceptable 
price that a business can use 
Competitive pricing varies 
according to competition 
Price elasticity of demand 
and dynamic pricing varies 
according to demand 
Advantages 
* Can help capture market 
Provides flexibility 
* 
Increase profit margins 
share 
depending on internaland 
|+ 
 Attract consumers 
* Canhelp increase revenue 
external factors 
perceiving high price as 
from sales (loss leader) 
Accounts for the costs 
an indication of premium 
* Canprevent or eliminate 
of production (cost-plus, 
quality 
competition (predatory) 
contribution) 
» Mightbe used as 
« Can help raise awareness 
Ensures a predetermined 
differentiation from 
of 
a new brand on the 
profit margin 
competitors 
market (penetration) 
» 
Allow for offsetting 
high R&D costs early in 
the product life cycle, 
especially for products 
with a short life cycle, such 
as technological gadgets 
Disadvantages 
|+ 
Difficult to maintain in the 
Can be challenging to 
* 
Usually requires a well- 
long run, as profit margins 
implement, as usually 
established brand or highly 
may be slim (or non- 
requires gathering large 
innovative product, which 
existent) and low prices 
amounts of data (cost-plus, 
can be costly 
may tarnish the brand 
contribution) 
» Might be considered 
Businesses might lose sales 
illegal in some countries 
if price is much higher than 
(predatory) 
that of the competition 
233

234 
Marketing 
Competitive pricing is perhaps the most relevant pricing strategy for any business 
organization that has several competitors selling a similar product. With the increased 
level of online purchases from organizations like Alibaba and Amazon, more 
businesses will need to use some form of competitive pricing to stay relevant. Other 
examples where competitive pricing is used include grocery stores, supermarkets, and 
fast food restaurants. 
While competitive pricing offers some obvious advantages for many businesses, 
smaller businesses may not be able to ignore their costs when setting prices. 
Summary 
Understanding the theory of each pricing strategy in context of one of the three 
categories — cost-based, market-based, or competition-based —is a good place to 
start. However, business organizations can and often do use a combination of these 
strategies in practice. For example, a business will want to avoid completely ignoring 
its costs when taking a competition-based or market-based approach. 
Another way of looking at these pricing strategies is in terms of setting high or low 
prices. The pricing strategies that involve setting low prices are usually short-term 
tactics and can rarely be applied for long and across an entire product portfolio. Very 
few businesses (especially smaller businesses) can survive or thrive in the long term 
with low prices. 
Just like other marketing mix elements, pricing should not be decided in isolation. 
Getting the pricing right is a high priority for most organizations. After all, it is the 
only element of the marketing mix that produces revenue. However, setting prices 
without carefully considering all elements of the marketing mix and the external 
environment will most likely result in lower profits. 
[n addition, business tools like the product life cycle, BCG matrix, and Porter’s generic 
strategies can be combined with pricing strategies to formulate a coherent marketing 
strategy. It may make sense to use a competitive pricing strategy for mature products 
(i.e., maturity stage of the product life cycle, and the cash cow of the BCG matrix). For 
organizations taking a cost leadership approach from Porter’s generic strategies, a 
cost-based pricing strategy may be the best option. 
Promotion 
Promotion is an attempt by marketers to inform people about products and persuade 
them to buy them. But how? What to say? To whom? And how often? 
Promotion can be done in several different ways, including: 
* 
advertising (online, print and TV ads, packaging, displays, logos) 
» 
public relations (press releases, seminars, annual reports, sponsorships, charitable 
donations) 
* 
sales promotion (coupons, rebates, contests, sampling) 
* 
direct marketing (emails, telemarketing, catalogs) 
* 
personal selling (presentations, meetings, incentive programs). 
Promotional activity can be further categorized by the target audience.

Above-the-line (ATL) promotion, such as television and radio advertising, or print 
advertising in newspapers and magazines, is aimed at mass or large audiences. ATL 
promotion is generally not targeted. This form of promotion tends to work best in 
the early stages of the product life cycle as a business builds brand awareness. Because 
this form of promotion can be costly, it is used mainly by larger organizations. A 
downside of this approach is that the effectiveness of ATL promotion can be difficult to 
measure. In addition, changes in technology (such as the increasing number of social 
media platforms) make it increasingly difficult to capture the attention of potential 
customers. 
In contrast, below-the-line (BTL) promotion refers to the various types of 
promotion that are focused on specific segments or groups and do not rely on mass 
promotion techniques. BTL promotional techniques include flyers, banners, text 
messages, emails, pamphlets, sponsorships, and in-store promotions. This form of 
promotion is usually less costly, so it is often used by smaller organizations and start- 
ups. BTL promotion tends to work best in the later stages of the product life cycle, to 
develop brand loyalty and solicit a direct response from the customer in the form of 
repeat sales. The major downside of this approach is that BTL promotion can narrow 
the target audience significantly, reducing the possibility of acquiring new customers 
and the ability to increase the overall brand value. 
An organization usually cannot rely on a single tool to promote its product. A 
successful promotion mix is one that balances the various forms of promotion 
in a planned and structured way. Through-the-line (TTL) promotion is 
an integrated marketing approach that includes both ATL and BTL elements. 
Organizations that use this approach try to leverage the benefits of ATL and BTL 
promotion, while minimizing the drawbacks. This can be done by using both 
ATL and BTL techniques, or by using digital marketing, which allows a business 
to use technologies such as cookies, algorithms, and social media to send targeted 
messages on a massive scale. 
ABOVE THE LINE 
Mass advertising - television, print, billboards, etc. 
THROUGH THE LINE 
Integrated approach using both ATL and BTL elements - e.g., digital advertising 
BELOW THE LINE 
Targeted advertising - SMS, emails, sponsorships, etc. 
Social media marketing 
In the previous section, we learned that promotion can be categorized by the target 
audience. ATL promotion is aimed at mass audiences, while BTL promotion targets 
specific segments or groups. TTL promotion indicates that this line is being blurred, 
meaning that organizations can now provide individualized communications 
‘Above-the-line’ and 
‘below-the-line’ were first 
used in the 1950s by the 
accountants at Procter 
& Gamble. They started 
paying advertising agencies 
differently depending on 
the type of promotional 
activity that was planned. 
Advertising agencies that 
used ATL promotion were 
paid on commission (a 
percentage of sales), while 
advertising firms that used 
BTL promotion methods 
were paid fixed fees. 
-« Above-, below- and through- 
the-line promaotion 
235

What impact has social 
media had on how 
consumers acquire and 
share knowledge of 
products? 
According (o Statista, over 
4 26 billion peaple warldwide 
used social media in 2021 
236 
Marketing 
(promotional materials) on a massive scale. One way this is done is through social 
media marketing (SMM). 
SMM, also known as digital marketing, is the use of digital platforms (such as 
Facebook, YouTube, WhatsApp, Instagram, WeChat, Twitter, or TikTok) to: 
* 
build a company’s brand 
* 
increase sales 
* 
connect and interact with existing and potential customers 
« 
gather data analytics to measure engagement. 
The first two bullet points are nothing new. After all, marketers have been trying to do 
this for years using print and television advertising. However, instead of just delivering 
a message thmugh a static advertisement, organizations can now connect, interact, 
and engage with new and existing customers quickly and on a global scale. In addition, 
social media platforms give individuals the opportunity to interact with companies 
located around the world. 
In 4.1 Introduction to marketing, we looked at how marketing is about more than 
getting the marketing mix elements right. Marketing is also about communicating the 
value a business can bring to its customers. Businesses can use SMM to amplify their 
story. For example, social media influencers with millions of followers can be hired or 
used to develop a company’s brand. 
In addition, as all SMM takes place in a digital environment, large amounts of data can 
be collected by businesses to track customer behavior and measure the effectiveness 
of various promotional strategies. This brings up ethical questions related to how a 
business should use social media and the large amounts of data available. 
* To what extent should social media be used to shape consumer behavior? 
* 
 What kind of data, and how much data, should be made available to social media 
platforms and businesses? 
* Towhat extent should these data be used? 
» 
Should businesses be able to control or regulate the social media accounts of their 
managers and employees? 
Regardless, the advantages for organizations of using SMM as a promotional strategy 
usually far exceed the disadvantages. Advantages of SMM as a promotional strategy 
include: 
» 
Connection: Through social media, businesses can gain instant access to a large 
audience. This can help small organizations with little funding to make potential 
customers aware of their brand. 
» 
Interaction: Social media platforms provide a space for organizations to engage 
with customers and vice versa (through commenting on and replying to posts). 
* Data: Massive amounts of customer data can be gathered through social media, 
and the effectiveness of SMM can be measured because the digital environment 
makes data collection and analysis relatively straightforward. 
» 
Competitive advantage: SMM can give small organizations a competitive 
advantage that they would not be able to achieve otherwise. Both large and small 
organizations have access to the same platforms.

+ Cost effective: Although some expertise and staffing may be required, social 
media accounts can be set up almost instantly at little to no cost to a business. 
The drawbacks of SMM are few but can be significant. Specifically, controlling the 
messages within social media platforms can be challenging. Organizations need to put 
in time and effort to manage their social media presence, creating interesting content 
and proactively responding to any negative posts. 
Place 
Products must be moved or distributed from where they are produced to a convenient 
place where buyers can see and purchase them. Place (or distribution) is the process of 
getting goods from producers to consumers, ensuring that products and services are 
available where and when they are required. 
Activity 
Next time you visit a supermarket or any retail store, pause for a minute and look at 
the huge variety of products on sale. Think of how many marketing steps were 
involved to bring you (the customer) the thousands of items that you see, from 
logistics to warehousing, to sorting and packaging. Some products may have been 
imported fresh from around the world, while others have been processed or frozen 
so that customers can access them all year round. 
And now, of course, so much retail activity takes place online, with much of the 
movement of physical goods taking place out of sight of the consumer. We also see the 
emerging circular economy, with models such as resource recovery, circular supply, and 
sharing impacting the way business is done with the aim of improving sustainability. 
Investigate how one of your favorite products traveled from the producer to you, 
the consumer. 
Consistent with the idea of a marketing mix, a company’s decisions involving place 
directly affect every other marketing decision. For example, a company’s pricing can 
depend on whether it uses mass merchandising or high-quality specialty stores. The 
former approach would be more likely to utilize pricing strategies such as cost-plus or 
penetration pricing, while the latter would use pricing strategies like premium pricing. 
IB learner profile 
Risk-takers 
Although using social media 
marketing is commaonplace in 
today’s business world, discuss 
emerging technologies that 
businesses could consider using 
for their marketing activity. 
237

Car part manufacturers often 
specialize in producing only 
onhe or two specific 
compaonents 
238 
Marketing 
[n addition, some organizations choose to use intermediaries such as wholesalers 
and retailers to promote their product. Companies may have multiple distribution 
channels, depending on the type of product and the needs of the customers. For 
example, some businesses may use multiple wholesalers and retailers to sell their 
products, while also offering consumers the ability to purchase directly online. 
Customers versus consumers 
Let's review the terms ‘customer’ and ‘consumer’, as this can cause some confusion 
when learning about distribution. 
Customers are stakeholders who purchase a product from a business; consumers 
are the ultimate users of a product. Customers can be individuals but are often 
another business. For example, in a business-to-business (B2B) transaction, a tire 
manufacturer can sell tires to a car manufacturer. The car manufacturer then uses 
those tires in the production of a car and sells the car to an independent dealership. 
The car manufacturer is a customer of the tire manufacturer, and the car dealership is 
a customer of the automobile company, but neither are consumers. In this case, the 
consumer would be the individual who ultimately buys the car from the dealership. 
Returning to the tire manufacturer, they would need to understand the needs and 
wants of their customer (the car manufacturer) but would also need to understand 
the needs and wants of the end consumer (the car buyer) to have a successful 
business. 
In some cases, customers and consumers are the same thing and can be used 
interchangeably. For example, the car buyer is the car dealership’s customer and is 
also the consumer. When it comes to customers, consumers, and distribution, the 
important thing is to clarify the perspective and context of the situation. Otherwise, 
the marketing mix element of place can get quite confusing. 
Channels of distribution 
Several options are available when it comes to channels of distribution. This can 
range from a business selling directly to the consumer, eliminating the need for any 
intermediaries (agents, wholesalers, or retailers), to a business using one or multiple 
intermediaries. Agents (or brokers) can facilitate a sale by bringing buyers and sellers 
together, often in exchange for a commission (fee). Wholesalers make bulk purchases 
and then sell the product in smaller amounts. Retailers are like wholesalers, but 
specialize in reducing the sales amounts to single items that are sold to consumers. 
Retailers sometimes purchase from wholesalers.

Channels of distribution 
Intermediaries 
Most businesses can determine the appropriate channel(s) of distribution by 
considering the following five factors: 
1 Economic: Using intermediaries such as wholesalers and retailers usually means 
higher prices for consumers. Wholesalers or retailers will need to sell a product 
for more than it cost them to obtain it to make a profit. A manufacturer can 
maximize its profit by reducing the number of intermediaries involved and selling 
directly to the consumer. The manufacturer would then collect the full amount 
the consumer was willing to pay, without losing a share to an intermediary. 
Control: A manufacturer can maintain more control by selling directly to 
consumers. Outside agencies might not master the details of every product and 
may favor customers who buy the most goods, rather than the manufacturer’s 
goods. In addition, manufacturers may not want to sell their products in the 
same space as their competitors. Using intermediaries can limit the interactions 
between the manufacturer and consumer, which could prevent a manufacturer 
from making changes needed to stay relevant in the market. 
Specialization: A business may not have the ability, expertise, or desire to sell 
its product directly to the consumer. Intermediaries like retailers can utilize their 
superior efficiency and expertise in making the sale. For example, clothing retailers 
give consumers the ability to try on clothes and receive advice from store employees. 
Furthermore, many consumers appreciate the convenience of retail stores that allow 
for comparison shopping and access to a variety of products in one location. 
Adaptability: Agreements with intermediaries mean that a manufacturer will 
need to commit to supplying a particular product over a given period. This can 
restrict its level of innovation and its ability to adapt to changes in the external 
environment. Businesses that use intermediaries may need to keep producing 
in large batches, even if their products become obsolete, so perishable products 
often require more direct distribution channels. 
Nature of the product: Some products may be perishable or quickly decay. In 
these cases, a short channel of distribution would be required and in some cases 
specialized care like refrigeration would also need to be provided during the 
distribution process. 
Some large businesses, such as Tesla and Apple, have chosen to reduce the number of 
intermediaries used in their distribution strategies. Both Tesla and Apple operate their 
«f Figure4.13 Businesses 
have several options when 
deciding how to distribute 
their product to customers 
and consumers 
239

240 
Marketing 
own retail stores to maximize control of their brands and the gathering of important 
customer data. However, it is rare for a business to utilize a single distribution channel. 
Apple also utilizes third-party providers to sell its products (such as by selling their 
phones through cellular network carriers). Taking a multi-channel approach gives 
organizations the ability to access larger audiences but requires careful coordination to 
manage costs and maintain control. 
Another interesting and unique example is Coca-Cola, which utilizes multiple 
channels in its distribution process. It uses a franchising model, with independent 
canning and bottling companies, and many distributors, wholesalers, and retailers 
located around the world to deliver its products to consumers. These intermediaries 
provide the local expertise needed to make Coca-Cola products available in some of 
the more remote locations around the world. 
Many organizations that operate within the service sector also need to make 
distribution decisions. For example, financial institutions such as banks and credit 
unions can offer online services directly to consumers and provide in-person financial 
services through local branches. Educational institutions are also diversifying their 
offerings, providing online courses and degrees, and opening regional campuses 
located in different parts of the world. 
Case study - Conflictfood 
Social enterprises often have special considerations to consider when making 
distribution decisions. Conflictfood, based in Berlin, provides culinary treasures 
from selected regions undergoing turmoil. To reach its social objectives of 
strengthening economic structures within regions such as Afghanistan, Myanmar, 
and Palestine, fighting poverty, and creating peaceful perspectives, it looks to 
reduce the number of intermediaries in its business model. Specifically, it utilizes 
direct trade and relationships with suppliers, and mostly sells directly to consumers 
online. Although Conflictfood uses some independent retailers, it looks for stores 
that share its social objectives, such as GoodBuy and Ankorstore. 
Explain the importance of the different distribution channels used by social 
enterprises such as Conflictfood. 
Extended marketing mix 
The marketing mix elements of product, price, promotion, and place play an 
indispensable role in the marketing of tangible goods. Although they are also relevant 
to services, applying just these elements to services can mean falling short. When 
it comes to intangible products or services, consumers’ perceptions become a very 
important part of the transaction. 
Intangible products or services need three additional Ps: 
» people 
*+ 
process 
* physical evidence.

People 
While extraordinary products and unique services still afford a competitive 
advantage, the one advantage that stands the test of time ... is people. 
Mark Salsbury, author of Human Capital Management 
This quote beautifully summarizes the underpinning role that people play in 
a company's marketing efforts. In the context of the marketing mix, ‘people’ 
refers to the skills, attitudes, knowledge, and appearance of the employees, and 
the interaction and relationships between key stakeholders (like customers and 
employees). Selling services successfully requires people who can interact with 
customers in a positive way and create a direct impact on how a company’s product 
or service is perceived. 
Some of the ways in which people can be effective in the delivery of services are: 
* 
creating a positive impression, to encourage customers to return 
» 
staff who do not keep customers waiting 
* 
providing useful feedback to customer queries or complaints 
« 
appropriately trained and well-motivated employees who understand a variety of 
cultures. 
Marketing can no longer just be left to the marketing department. Every employee of 
an organization can play an important role in the marketing of a business. 
Connections can be made to topics within human resource management. For example, 
the recruitment, training, and development of staff with a focus on customer service 
are key parts of this element of the marketing mix. Furthermore, developing this 
marketing mix element may include creating an appropriate business culture to foster 
and encourage timely and appropriate service to customers. 
Process 
Process refers to ‘the ease of doing business’, or the way in which a service is ordered, 
received, and paid for by the customer. A company can get the process right when it 
looks at this from the customer’s point of view. 
Examples of best processes in the marketing of services include: 
 multiple, fast, and secure order and payment methods (such as the option to pay 
by cash, check, credit card, or mobile payments) 
| Good customer service is 
critical in many industries 
In The People’s Republic 
of China, online deliveries 
go via one of two routes, 
Groceries or food 
deliveries via Meituan 
or ale.me go directly to 
customers. Other products 
ordered from |D.com or 
Taobao are delivered via 
'beehives’ - lockers installed 
in compounds, for which 
the customer gets a text 
message with the key code 
to retrieve their order. 
241

Marketing 
» 
thedelivery process can be developed into a USP if it is timely and more flexible 
than competitors; for example, a customer placing a supermarket order online, 
and that delivery arriving with the customer within an agreed time slot 
* 
short waiting times for customers; for example, with mobile taxi booking 
services, such as Uber and Didi, customers provide feedback through rating their 
drivers, which has improved services considerably 
» 
after-sales service or care (such as helpdesks, warranties, or the servicing and 
repair of equipment) can also serve as a USP to distinguish a business from their 
competitors. 
Physical evidence 
A service cannot be experienced before it is delivered. Physical evidence is therefore 
the ‘proof’ that allows customers to see for themselves the quality of service being 
provided. In other words, physical evidence refers to the tangible aspects or physical 
environment of the business in which the customers and employees interact. 
There is an element of risk in buying a service as opposed to a tangible product. 
However, such uncertainties can be reduced in the following ways: 
* 
clean and tidy reception area 
 good location and presentation of business premises 
» 
staff attire to professional standards 
* providing a pleasant ambience 
* 
soliciting customer feedback 
* giving customers a high-quality online experience 
* 
attractive product packaging 
* 
positive testimonials from customers. 
Activity 
How would the marketing mix elements (including the extended marketing mix) 
apply to your experience as a student? As you consider this question, review all the 
elements of the marketing mix and the corresponding subtopics. Consider your 
business management course, your other courses, or both when thinking about the 
following. 
* Product: Describe the product (service) that your school is providing. 
* 
Price: Outline what pricing strategies (if any) are being used. 
* Promotion: Ask yourself whether you are familiar with any of the promotional 
strategies being used by your school and to what extent social media marketing 
is being used or should be used. 
* 
Place: Explore how the product (service) is distributed to the customer. 
* People: Describe the skills, attitudes, knowledge, and appearance of employees 
and the interaction and relationships between key stakeholders (for example, 
students, teachers, administrators). 
* 
Process: Describe the way in which the service is ordered, received, and paid for. 
* Physical evidence: Describe the tangible aspects or physical environment of 
the business. 
242

