Practice questions 
Office Supplies (OS) is a family-owned private limited company that, for 40 years, 
has operated three retail office supply stores in a small city. OS offers a wide range 
of office products (such as computer paper and stationery) and office machinery 
(such as computers and printers). When each store opened, OS purchased the 
buildings using long-term loan capital. OS's objective is to have enough profit to 
finance the company’s working capital and pay annual dividends. 
OS has no clear marketing strategy. Traditionally, OS competed with several other 
office supply stores operating in the same city. The market was not competitive, 
however, and most customers went to the nearest office supply store. OS’s prices 
were comparable to those of other retail office supply stores, and the company did 
little promotion. 
Nationally, the retail office supply store industry is declining. Many retail office 
supply stores have had to close, and new competitors have entered the market, 
many of which benefit from some or all of the following: 
* 
specialized office products 
* economies of scale, leading to more competitive prices 
» 
greater convenience, including online stores with door-to-door delivery. 
Like other physical retail stores, OS has seen its sales decline, and profit margins 
have fallen. Last year, to ensure there were enough funds for capital expenditure 
and revenue expenditure, OS’s board of directors chose not to pay dividends. OS 
also anticipates the need for additional finance next year. OS’s board is considering 
changes to the company’s marketing mix in response to new competitors. 
1 
Discuss possible changes to any two elements of OS’s 
marketing mix. 
(10 marks) 
4.6 International marketing 
Learning outcome 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
» 
discuss the opportunities and threats posed by entering and operating 
internationally. 
This final subtopic on international marketing will be an excellent way to review and 
connect previous topics and concepts. First, we will briefly explore the ways in which 
businesses can enter international markets, and then focus on the opportunities and 
threats of entering and operating internationally. 
243

Marketing 
Methods of entry into international markets 
As discussed in Unit 1, businesses have multiple options when it comes to growth. 
Many of these same strategies can be used to enter international markets. Some of 
these include: 
» Exporting: The business makes the product in its home country and either 
manages the marketing directly (e.g., through e-commerce), sending the product 
to the country of consumption, or hires an intermediary or agent abroad to 
manage the marketing of the product. 
* 
Directinvestment: The business sets up and establishes production plants and 
distribution channels abroad under the direct control and ownership of the business. 
» Franchising: A business sells the right to use its brand and related products or 
services to other businesses abroad (franchisees). 
 Licensing: A business located in another country purchases the right to produce 
a product of the multinational company. Licensing is often used for physical 
goods, while franchising is often used in the service industry. 
* Joint ventures: Businesses from two different countries join to form a third 
company, sharing the risk and optimizing the comparative advantages of the two 
original companies. 
* Merger and acquisitions: Two businesses with similar aims legally consolidate 
into one company to share their resources. 
Activity 
minutes the progress of 200 countries in 200 years. 
Watch this short video from Hans Rosling explaining in four 
E il E 
3 
You can also visit Gapminder to explore more videos and tools 
to help you understand the world better. Explain the 
Toolkit connsction 
opportunities and the threats that emerge from the trends being 
displayed through the visualizations and interactions with 
Applying the Ansoff 
s 
global data. 
Matrix, is a form of market 
development. Although 
this can be risky; it can be 
an effective way to increase 
profits, especially when 
the product is entering 
Advantages of entering and operating internationally 
the final stages of its life 
There are several advantages to a business operating internationally. Many of these benefits 
cycle in the home market. 
are related to marketing and were discussed in Unit 1. Some of these benefits include: 
However, operating in a 
larger market could prevent 
+ Larger market size: Offering products internationally means a business will 
the organization from taking 
: 
: 
A 
: 
have access to many more potential customers, increasing its market share and 
advantage of the benefits 
L 
R 
. 
of remaining small, such as 
raising the possibility of becoming a market leader. 
flexibility, lower overheads, 
* Greater security: In Unit 1, we looked at how larger firms are less likely to become 
the ability to provide 
personal services, and ease of 
communications. 
244 
bankrupt or be taken over by other organizations. In addition, operating in multiple 
countries means a business can spread its risk. For example, a fall in economic activity 
in one country can be mitigated by gains in economic activity in other countries.

» Economies of scale: Expanding internationally can allow a business to lower 
its per unit production costs, whether that be through economies of scale in 
management, marketing, or purchasing, or another form of economy of scale. 
* Brand development: International marketing allows a business to build its 
brand, communicating with customers on a global scale. A level of prestige can 
be obtained, allowing a business to differentiate itself from competitors that 
operate only domestically. Of course, developing an international brand can be 
challenging and complex due to the range of cultures and perspectives. 
Disadvantages of entering and operating internationally 
The disadvantages of entering and operating internationally can be analyzed through 
the STEEPLE framework. STEEPLE analysis is used to analyze the current external 
factors affecting an organization. 
* 
Social: Due to variations in demographics, lifestyles, tastes, and cultures, entering 
and operating in international markets can be challenging. To minimize these 
challenges, organizations will want to choose the right method of entry so that 
they can utilize local knowledge and expertise. 
» Technological: Although the internet and social media can alleviate some of 
the technological issues of operating in a foreign environment, technological 
infrastructure, and the use of innovative technologies such as machine learning 
can vary widely depending on locality. The omnipresence of e-commerce has 
increased competition globally. 
« 
Economic: Employment rates, inflation, income levels, cost of living, purchasing 
power, and exchange rates can all vary across different regions, making it 
challenging for a business to replicate its business model across borders. 
« Environmental and ethical: Ethical issues such as sharing prosperity and 
impact on the environment can be difficult for organizations to achieve when 
operating on a global scale. Multinational companies can negatively impact the 
host country by imposing their ways and depredating the host country’s cultural 
identity. Businesses that have a negative image abroad may also damage their 
reputation in their home market. 
« 
Political and legal: A range of political and legal threats face a business as it 
enters and operates internationally. These can include political instability, varying 
levels of regulation, anti-competition legislation, international trade agreements, 
higher tax rates, health and safety laws, consumer protection and employment 
laws, and intellectual property rights. 
Further connections can be made to branding. As a business enters and operates 
internationally, it can take a pan-global approach, applying its marketing mix and 
brand worldwide, or take more of a global localization approach, changing its 
marketing mix to adapt to the local language, culture, and customs. 
By adapting content for different languages and platforms, and creating shows fora 
specific region, Netflix can be seen as an example of an organization taking a global 
localization strategy. 
What other examples can you think of? 
245

"Il 
Marketing 
Practice questions 
Although there are many threats to entering and operating internationally, many 
businesses find ways to overcome these threats. According to an article in the India 
Times, after losing market share on over two-thirds of its product categories and 
posting significant losses, Procter & Gamble (P&G) was able to turn things around 
in India by: 
* 
de-prioritizing several unprofitable lines 
« gradually shifting from high margin, urban-centric products to lower-priced 
products. 
Today, P&G has over 50 per cent of the market share in shaving razors, diapers, and 
napkins, and a significant market share in the shampoo and laundry segments in India. 
1 
 Discuss the opportunities and threats posed to MNCs like Procter 
& Gamble by entering and operating internationally. 
(10 marks) 
Summary 
In this unit, you have learned: 
* 
Marketing activity aims to identify, anticipate, and meet the needs and wants of 
customers and society. 
* 
Marketing activity also involves communicating the value a business can bring 
to its target audience. 
* 
Developing a marketing strategy involves segmentation, targeting, branding, 
positioning, and differentiation. 
. 
Using simple linear regression to forecast sales can help a business make 
decisions and formulate business and marketing plans. 
* 
Gathering and analyzing a variety of market research can help a business make 
informed decisions. 
* The 7Ps of the marketing mix (product, price, place, promotion, people, process, 
and physical evidence) work together to formulate an effective marketing 
strategy. 
- 
Entering and operating internationally provides unique opportunities 
and threats to business organizations. 
246


