248 
Operations management 
Conceptual understandings 
» Change in operations impacts other business activities. 
* Creative production process can disrupt the market. 
» 
Operational business changes may affect its ethical stance. 
* Sustainability ensures efficiency in business operations. 
5.1 Introduction to operations management 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
describe and explain the role of the operations management functional area. 
These are questions based on themes within this unit that you could conduct some 
independent research about. You could explore: 
* How can high standards in operations management make a business more 
viable? 
» How can waste management and quality management contribute to efficiency 
and sustainability? 
*  Why could outsourcing result in lower quality products or services? 
* How can break-even analysis help decision-making? 
* How can technology improve business productivity? 
»  Why could research and development (R&D) enhance creativity in a business? 
 How does digital technology enable new business models to flourish? 
The role of operations management 
Operations management encompasses the design and control of production processes 
and business operations involved in the production of goods and services. The 
overarching goal of operations management is to ensure that business operations use 
as few resources as possible while meeting customer requirements. 
Regardless of the size of a business, operations management plays an integral part in 
its success. From large scale motor assembly lines to factories producing thousands 
of biscuits per day, from a web design company to an independent donut store, all 
businesses need to consider how they will approach operations management to get the 
best possible result for their customers. 
Operations management looks different from business to business but key elements of 
operations management are: 
» Demand and supply analysis: Understanding product demand, supply 
requirements, and business forecasting are critical in manufacturing operations. 
 Inventory management: This includes management of raw materials, quality of 
goods, services, and finished products.

Operations management 
Inputs 
I 
e Capital 
» |nventory 
e Finished goods 
® Raw materials 
Supply chain 
® Packaging 
® Machinery 
Capacity strategy 
e Warehouse & 
* Workers 
Quality control 
Storage 
Process strategy 
e Distribution 
Services 
Geography 
* Supply chain management: This involves everything from sourcing raw 
materials to product storage to distribution. 
» 
Capacity management: Production capacity needs to be evaluated based on 
demand, productivity, and input inventory. 
* Processand layout strategy: Factory and workplace layouts, operational 
processes, and production methods are all critical for business output. 
» 
Geography strategy: This involves the need to evaluate locations for factories, 
warchouses, distribution centers, and retail outlets. 
While operations is responsible for producing products and/or delivering services, it 
needs support and input from other functional areas of the organization. For example, 
finance, marketing, and operations are closely linked. 
The finance department is responsible for securing resources at favorable prices 
and allocating those resources throughout the organization, as well as budgeting, 
analyzing investment proposals, and providing funds for operations to take place. 
Marketing is responsible for assessing consumer wants and needs, and selling and 
promoting the organization’s goods or services. Feedback from the marketing 
department on product success will inform future production planning by the 
operations team. Operations are responsible for producing the goods or providing the 
services offered by the organization, but both finance and marketing play a part in this. 
With sustainability becoming an increasingly important goal of businesses, operations 
play an integral part in helping to achieve the triple bottom line (TBL). The TBL s a 
business concept that suggests that rather than solely focusing on generating profit, 
or the standard ‘bottom line’, firms should commit to measuring their social and 
environmental impact, in addition to their financial performance. This means looking 
at the sustainability of supply chains, as well as the impact of operations on the local 
communities that an organization operates within, and improving supply chains to 
ensure favorable outcomes for all involved. 
<« Figure5.1 
Operations 
management 
Toolkit connection 
Circular supply models use 
renewable or recovered 
materials, reducing demand 
for the extraction of new 
resources. Reduced extraction 
benefits the business and 
society in several ways, 
including reduced waste and 
lower energy use. 
249

