IB learner profile 
Inquirers 
Research a business of your 
choice (other than IKEA, 
LEGO®, and The North Face®) 
that has adopted a triple 
bottom line (TBL) approach. 
How have they adjusted their 
operations and what have the 
impacts been on their internal 
and external stakeholders? 
250 
Operations management 
Some large multinational businesses have adapted their operations to focus on the TBL: 
*» 
IKEA, the home furnishing company, has saved over $1 million by recycling food 
waste. 
* LEGO®, the toy manufacturer, has committed to use 100 per cent renewable energy 
by 2030, and has begun creating plant-based plastics to make its products more 
sustainable. 
* The North Face®, the outdoor clothing company, has pledged to use 100 per cent 
responsibly sourced fabrics by 2025, to work with retailers and suppliers to reduce 
their environmental footprint, and to eliminate single-use plastic packaging by 2025. 
Practice questions 
1 
Define the term ‘triple bottom line’. 
(2 marks) 
2 Explain two key roles of the operations management department. 
(4 marks) 
5.2 Operations methods 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
 describe, compare, and contrast the features of each method of production 
« analyze the suitability of a method of production for a given context 
» 
justify a method of production for a given situation. 
One of the main purposes of operations management is to produce goods and provide 
services. If there are tangible goods to be produced, the organization will need to 
consider which method of production to adopt to produce those goods. There are a 
variety of operations methods that an organization can consider. 
Job production 
This production method concentrates on 
producing high-quality, usually one-off, 
customized products that meet the specific 
needs of customers. It is highly specialized, 
labor intensive, and market oriented, with the 
customer often consulted at regular intervals 
as the production progresses to ensure it aligns 
with their specification. Job production can 
involve both small-scale, low technology projects, such as an haute couture dress, as 
well as large, complex projects involving high technology, such as luxury sports cars. 
Job production is well suited to smaller, specialist firms as there are fewer 
opportunities for economies of scale and the market is not as price-sensitive, meaning 
higher prices are expected. However, some large scale projects, such as one-off 
construction developments, are associated with larger firms generating high revenue 
and profit levels. Either way, there is still a clear focus on meeting customer needs.

Advantages 
* 
High-quality products allow an increased mark up. 
* 
Personalized products bring in more revenue and increase customer satisfaction. 
* 
There is higher 
job satisfaction and increased motivation among workers due to 
their strong commitment to the tasks. 
* Job production can have a flexible production process. 
Disadvantages 
» 
Highly skilled workers and specialized machines increase the production costs. 
« 
Production can take up a lot of time and resources. 
* 
It can be difficult to find replacement components if mistakes are made in 
production as the products are uniquely designed. 
Batch production 
Batch production is a method of 
manufacturing where identical or similar 
items are produced together for different 
sized production runs. The method allows 
for products, from baked goods to children’s 
toys, to be mass produced in batches with 
small to major changes to the product. 
Changes can occur between different batches, including changes to colors, sizes, and 
styles. If 
a product needs to be altered, the change can be made between batches. 
Advantages 
* 
Products can be produced in larger quantities, reducing the overall cost per unit 
and achieving economies of scale. 
« 
Companies may focus on a small group of products, leading to greater quality 
control and specialization. 
» 
Labor costs are reduced, as workers only focus on a particular task or set of tasks. 
* One machine can handle several different product configurations, reducing costs 
and allowing products to be produced according to customer specifications. 
* 
This method lends itself to repeat orders, meaning a smoother, more consistent 
production flow over time. 
* 
Batch production is also suitable for trialing new products, as a small quantity of 
the product can be produced. 
Disadvantages 
» 
Each batch must be tested for quality and uniformity before future batches can be 
produced, causing idle downtime. 
* 
Machinery must be stopped and recalibrated between batches, causing downtime. 
» 
Storage costs are high for large batches of the same product. 
» 
Employees can become demotivated by lack of variety in their work. 
231

252 
Operations management 
Interesting information 
Alights-out factory, also called a dark factory, is 
one where requirements for human activity are so 
minimal that the facility can operate in the dark with 
zero human intervention on site. As manufacturing 
companies consider what the ‘factory of the future’ 
will look like, autonomous production within a 
lights-out factory seems likely to expand across the industrial spectrum. 
Lights-out factories, and more commonly, lights-out manufacturing cells, are possible 
because of the development and maturity of automated machines and robots, as well as 
comprehensive and proven manufacturing operations management (MOM) software. 
MOM software has the capacity to orchestrate fully automated manufacturing 
processes. Human stakeholders can remotely oversee lights-out operations and receive 
alerts to address any problems or issues should they arise. 
The lights-out factory is most easily implemented for the simple mass production 
of a standard product on a fixed schedule. A completely dark factory becomes more 
difficult (though possible) as products grow in complexity and mass customization 
creates many product variants. Some manufacturers can gain the advantages of 
autonomous production without transitioning to a full lights-out factory by having 
a lights-sparse’ factory floor, in which lights-out manufacturing is confined to 
specific operations and/or areas. 
Mass production 
Mass production, also known as flow production or continuous production, is the 
production of substantial amounts of standardized products in a constant flow along 
an assembly line. This is often the method companies turn to when they want to 
quickly produce a large number of goods to enter or be sold on the consumer market. 
Due to the automated nature of mass production, the need for skilled labor diminishes, 
often only being required for quality control, monitoring, and maintenance. This is 
enhanced by the ever-growing sophistication of technology, particularly developments in 
robotics. As machines do not need time away from the task for rest breaks or to eat, it is 
common for production facilities to operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week where necessary. 
Advantages 
* Mass production lowers the cost of production and labor per unit as huge technical 
and purchasing economies of scale can be realized. 
* 
It takes less time to produce products. 
* 
Quality control can increase and product variation can decrease. 
* 
Increasing product output, convenience, and production efficiency will allow the 
business to produce large quantities of standardized products. 
Disadvantages 
* Mass production systems such as assembly lines involve high set-up costs due to 
advanced automated technologies. 
» Ongoing costs to maintain and upgrade these systems may also come at a high 
price, especially if the systems are in constant use.

* 
Breakdowns on the production line can be costly if the assembly line is out of 
action for a prolonged period. 
» Asautomation takes the role of skilled workers, there can be high employee 
turnover and low morale. 
* 
Mass production can negatively impact the environment because it requires a large 
number of resources. 
» 
Ifthere is a sudden decrease in demand, the business might have a large quantity of 
finished products that will not sell or will have to be sold at a huge discount. 
Mass customization 
Mass customization (also known as made-to-order or built-to-order) involves the use 
of flexible computer-aided manufacturing systems to produce customized output. It 
combines the flexibility and personalization of custom-made products with the low 
unit costs associated with mass production. 
Customers get a list of predefined features to choose from. The price of the final 
customized product can increase or decrease from its base price depending on the 
desired configurations. Nike By You, or NikeiD, from apparel manufacturer Nike is 
a perfect example of mass customization in marketing and manufacturing. It allows 
customers to personalize their own Nike products, including clothing and footwear, 
from colors and materials to style. 
Nike was one the first sports brands to embrace mass customization with its NikeiD 
range. Visit the Nike website and try out the service. 
What type of customers might Nike be targeting with this service? 
How have its competitors responded? In your opinion, does 
Nike hold a competitive advantage with this service? 
Advantages 
* Mass customization allows customers to choose from a range of customizable 
design specifications, colors, structures, and patterns. 
* 
It can attract customers and improve the brand image. 
253

294 
Operations management 
» The unit cost of products reduces as the scale of production increases. 
* 
It ensures timely delivery using existing equipment and technologies and new 
programs and procedures. 
* 
It gives brands a competitive advantage. 
* 
It helps businesses maintain long-term customer relationships and retain existing 
consumers. 
Disadvantages 
» Depending on where the product customizations are made, there is the risk of 
holding many parts. 
» Depending on the customizations, it may not be possible to resell the products, 
making handling returns difficult. 
* Adding customization steps can add substantial costs to operations. 
Choosing the most suitable production method 
When making a production decision, there are several factors a business needs to 
consider that will influence the most suitable form of production. 
Quantity 
The operations manager will need an idea of the potential output levels they are 
looking to produce as this will be a key determinant of the production method. Large 
scale, continuous production requirements will lean more toward mass and flow 
production whereas bespoke one-off products will be more aligned to job 
production. 
Technology 
The level of technology available will feed into the operations manager’s decision, as 
the production process decision depends on the technology required. For example, 
if there are many orders and the business doesn’t have the right equipment, it may be 
unable to mass produce them. Ensuring the business has the right technology to track, 
sort, and build the products is vital. 
Production timing 
Continuous processes use long production cycles that could last for a long time. Long 
production cycles are ideal for high volume and low variety products but unsuitable 
for highly customized products. 
Input combinations 
Input combinations are the labor and capital methods that go into manufacturing a 
product. Before deciding how many products to produce and the method for creating 
them, the business must make sure the material and labor costs make business sense. 
Ensuring enough revenue is generated to make an adequate and stable profit helps the 
organization function properly. 
Target market 
Customers may be demanding a high level of customization and quality that requires a 
job production approach. However, in price-sensitive market segments, high volume, 
low-cost standardized products may be necessary.

Nature of the firm 
Small, independent firms may be limited by the costs required to adopt mass 
production techniques. 
Government policies 
Governments may offer various incentives to businesses to stimulate investment and 
economic growth. By offering grants, subsidies, and tax breaks, governments may 
persuade some firms to make production more capital-intensive. 
The nature of the product 
The product itself may determine the production method; for example, one-off 
a 
construction projects such as concert halls or sports stadiums will require job production. 
Farms are often subsidized by 
governments 
Case study - Doogle’s Donuts 
Should we hold 
companies responsible 
Doogle’s Donuts has already amassed a legion of fans 
for the applications of 
thanks to its elaborate handcrafted donuts, with its first 
E:?S:;i;ﬁﬁ;i?te 
store regularly seeing queues stretching down the street. 
' 
Located on Leyland Street, Prescot, UK, Doogle’s Donuts 
first opened its doors in September 2020. It sells freshly 
baked gourmet donuts and a variety of hot drinks. 
Its owners have opened a second establishment on the vibrant and buzzing Lark 
Lane, in Liverpool, UK. 
Founder Christian Anderson, 27, told the local newspaper, the Liverpool Echo: Tm 
really excited about it. The whole idea of the Lark Lane shop is so we can provide 
that in-house meeting space where people can meet up and socialize, I want to 
create an atmosphere where people can come and socialize and even do some work.’ 
‘Lark Lane is going to be a completely different story to Prescot because there’s a 
lot more people there —as a business, it was a good move for us to find somewhere 
with a bit more footfall. It was a little bit impulsive; we were walking down Lark 
Lane and all of a sudden, there was a shop there to let and we got on the phone 
straight away and arranged a meeting. 
‘It was the perfect space and we just went with it — you've just got to take that 
opportunity, even though we're a relatively young business, it was a good move for 
us. We want to give our customers something special.’ 
The new shop sells the company’s popular range of gourmet donuts including the 
Eton Mess donut, which is a strawberry glaze topped with meringue and freeze 
dried strawberries; the El Bueno, which is a Nutella® glaze with white chocolate 
curls topped with a Kinder Bueno piece; the Homer, an original ring donut with a 
pink glaze and sprinkles; and the Bigscoff, which is a toffee glaze dipped in a Lotus 
Biscoff biscuit crumb with Lotus Biscoff sauce and a caramel Rolo center. 
Christian says: ‘Every donut is fresh. We call them gourmet because they are all 
handcrafted and we put time and energy into every donut. 
299

