IB learner profile 
Risk-takers 
When looking to adopt a 
method of production as a new 
business or change an existing 
method in place, there is an 
element of risk involved. Based 
on what you have learnt so far 
in the business management 
course, discuss in a small 
group ways in which a business 
would assess or mitigate the 
risk involved in decisions such 
as this. 
296 
Operations management 
‘We have classics like Cinnamon Sugar, jam, and the Happy Glaze, which we 
thought sounded like happy days. It’s nice to hear customers come in and ask for 
the donuts with their names.’ 
1 Define the terms ‘job production’ and ‘batch production’. 
2 Explain the method of production that is used by Doogle’s Donuts. 
3 Discuss whether Doogle’s Donuts should move to a flow production method. 
Practice questions 
1 Define the term ‘mass production’. 
(2 marks) 
2 Inreference to a real world example, explain one advantage 
and one disadvantage of using mass customization. 
(4 marks) 
3 Asthe first honey and hive product producer utilizing sustainable practices in 
the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Hatta Honey puts sustainable apiculture at 
the heart of everything it does. From sensitizing future generations to the role 
of bees and their importance in the ecosystem, to educating them about the 
UAE’s agricultural wealth and supporting ecotourism, it is one of the leading 
companies in the field of honey production that produces 100% natural, raw, and 
pure honey in the UAE. 
Throughout its journey, Hatta Honey has decided to look for the purest and 
most natural honey, and has succeeded in partnering with the most reputable 
beekeepers to ensure that the honey it provides adheres to 1SO, HACCP, and ESMA 
quality standards. 
Hatta Honey offers six main varieties of honey (Sidr, Samar, Ghaf, Mangrove, 
Wildflower, and Oak) and utilizes batch production, operating at the premium 
end of the honey market, with prices starting at around $25 for a jar. 
Hatta Honey is the largest honey producer in the UAE, operating more than 4,000 
colonies of honeybees and producing over 20 tons of honey per season. Examine the 
use of batch production as a method of production for Hatta Honey. 
(10 marks) 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
» 
outline the features of lean production 
* 
explain the methods of lean production that an organization can adopt 
» distinguish between quality control and quality assurance 
» explain the methods an organization can use to manage quality 
* examine the impact of lean production and total quality management on 
an organization 
» comment on the importance of an organization adhering to national and 
international safety standards.

The core idea of lean production is simple: to work on eliminating waste from the 
manufacturing process. 
Waste is defined as any activity that does not add value from the customer’s 
perspective. According to research conducted by the Lean Enterprise Research Centre 
(LERC), 60 per cent of production activities in a typical manufacturing operation are 
waste — they add no value at all for the customer. 
Lean production helps manufacturers to lower costs by reducing or eliminating 
unnecessary movements and processes, whether those activities are performed by 
workers or machines. By eliminating waste in an organization’s processes, efficiency is 
improved. In addition, helping businesses develop lean thinking cultures encourages 
employees to take the initiative and make improvements based on their observations 
and experiences. 
One of the first steps to adopting lean manufacturing methods is to identify and then 
work to minimize the eight types of waste. 
Inventory: Storing excessive inventory can be a waste of both space and money. 
2 
Motion: Both humans and machines can waste motion. For people, using 
excessive physical motion to reach, bend, and stretch wastes time, and can result in 
injury. Workstations should meet ergonomic principles and all materials necessary 
for task completion should be within arm’s reach of employees. For machines, 
using large capacity machines for small batches of work or running more 
machines than required to complete a particular job can waste energy and time. 
3 
Over-processing: The aim of lean is to make only what is needed when it is 
needed to meet customer demands. Making too much too soon often results 
in excessive inventory. Miscommunication, misunderstanding, mistakes, and 
breakdowns in the supply chain can also be causes of over-processing. 
4 
 Overproduction: Within the lean model, every item should be made as it is needed. 
This is called just-in-time (JIT) production. Overproduction is referred to as just-in- 
case (JIC) production, which creates long lead times resulting in high storage. The 
concept is to schedule and produce only what can be immediately sold or shipped. 
5 
Waiting: Waiting equals wasted time and wasted time equals lower profits. 
When one department must wait on another for a part, a price, or a process to be 
completed, production and/or service stops. Waiting disrupts production flow and 
can impede the effective elimination of waste. 
6 
 Transport: Consider how much time is wasted by not moving products or 
materials in the most effective and efficient way possible. For example, it is wasteful 
for a company to send out its biggest truck to deliver its smallest order. Eliminating 
transport waste can facilitate savings in multiple areas across business processes. 
7 
 Defects: Any time a batch of products does not meet specifications, time, money, 
and effort are wasted. In large scale manufacturing, there may not be the time to 
effectively use quality assurance to ensure the product has fewer defects. 
8 
Non-utilized talent: The most valuable resource in any organization is the 
employees. Not effectively using that resource creates waste by not recognizing 
and using the value and efficiency brought through skills and talent. 
After assessing each area of waste, an organization can implement lean best practices 
that can make operational activities run more smoothly, thus improving efficiency and 
increasing profit. 
297

IB learner profile 
Inquirers 
Toyota is well known for 
its adoption of continuous 
improvement and has 
embedded the philosophy 
of kaizen in its business. 
Investigate the use of kaizen 
at Toyota and write a short 
summary on: "What is kaizen 
and how does Toyota use it? 
Conceptual understanding: 
Creativity 
Two of the main concepts that 
underpin creativity include: 
- 
Originality: The idea should be 
something new. 
+ 
Functionality: The idea 
needs to possess a degree of 
usefulness and actually work. 
How does werking through the 
seven steps of kaizen support 
creativity in the workplace? 
298 
Operations management 
Methods of lean production 
To move toward lean production, an organization can look to adopt lean production 
methods. Two possible approaches are continuous improvement (kaizen) and just-in- 
time (JIT). 
Continuous improvement (kaizen) 
Kaizen is a compound of two Japanese words that together translate as ‘good change’ 
or ‘improvement’. Kaizen has come to mean ‘continuous improvement’ through its 
association with lean methodology and principles. 
Kaizen is an approach to creating continuous improvement based on the idea that 
small, ongoing positive changes can reap significant improvements. Kaizen is core 
to lean manufacturing and perhaps one of the best-known adopters of this approach 
is the Japanese motor vehicle manufacturer, Toyota, through its management 
philosophy ‘the Toyota Way’. It was developed to lower defects, eliminate waste, boost 
productivity, encourage worker purpose and accountability, and promote innovation. 
Ten principles of kaizen 
The ten principles that form the core kaizen philosophy are: 
1 Letgo of assumptions. 
Be proactive about solving problems. 
Don't accept the status quo. 
Let go of perfectionism and take an attitude of iterative, adaptive change. 
Look for solutions as you find mistakes. 
Create an environment in which everyone feels empowered to contribute. 
Don’t accept the obvious issue; instead, ask ‘why” five times to get to the root cause. 
Cull information and opinions from multiple people. 
= v 
= T e X 
] 
Use creativity to find low-cost, small improvements. 
— 
o 
Never stop improving. 
The kaizen cycle 
Kaizen can be implemented in a seven-step cycle to create an environment based on 
continuous improvement. 
This systematic method has the following steps: 
1 
Get employees involved: Seek the involvement of employees, including 
soliciting their help in identifying issues and problems, and solutions. Doing 
so creates buy-in for change. Often, this is organized as specific groups of 
individuals charged with gathering and relaying information from a wider group 
of employees. 
2 
Find problems: Using widespread feedback from all employees, gather lists of 
problems and potential solutions. 
3 
Create a solution: Encourage employees to offer creative solutions, with all manner 
of ideas encouraged. Pick a winning solution or solutions from the ideas presented. 
4 
Test the solution: Implement the winning solution, with everyone participating in 
the rollout. Create pilot programs or take other small steps to test out the solution.

Get 
employees 
involved. 
(7 
(2] 
Repeat on 
Gather a 
s 
Kaizen 
oroblems. 
cycle for 
continuous 
improvement 
Encourage 
solutions, then 
choose an 
idea. 
Kaizen requires identifying areas 
for improvement, creating solutions 
and plans for a rollout - and then 
cycling through the process again 
for other issues or issues that 
were inadequately 
addressed. 
If successful, 
adopt the 
solution. 
(5] 
o 
Regularl 
& 
y 
Test the 
measure and 
: 
solution. 
analyze the 
results. 
5 
Analyze the results: At various intervals, check progress, with specific plans 
for who will be the point of contact and how best to keep ground-level workers 
engaged. Determine how successful the change has been. 
Adopt: If results are positive, adopt the solution throughout the organization. 
7 
 Repeat: These seven steps should be repeated on an ongoing basis, with new 
solutions tested where appropriate or new lists of problems tackled. 
Just-in-time (JIT) 
Rather than producing goods and supplying customers from stock, JIT processes focus 
on producing exactly the amount the business needs exactly when their customers 
need it. This helps to minimize waste as stocks are not held by the business for 
extended periods of time, which ties up capital. JIT is covered in more detail later in 
this unit (5.6 Production planning). 
Cradle to cradle design and manufacturing 
With an increasing need to address climate change issues, businesses are looking for 
ways to become more sustainable in their approach to operating. With cradle to cradle 
(C2C) design and manufacturing, products are designed to be reused as materials for 
new products or to harmlessly biodegrade. Manufacturers are also encouraged to 
reduce their environmental impacts by conserving water and energy, and reducing 
pollution. The key is to become part of what is known as the ‘circular economy’. 
Originally developed in the 1990s by Prof. Dr Michael Braungart, William McDonough 
and EPEA Hamburg, cradle to cradle stands for innovation, quality, and beneficial design. 
«f Figure5.2 The kaizen cycle 
for continuous improvement 
IB learner profile 
Reflective 
Consider your consumption 
habits and the goods and 
services you consume on a 
regular basis. How many of 
these do you think are part 
of a circular economy at the 
moment? What evidence do 
you have to support this? What 
conscious changes can you 
make to your consumption 
behavior to align it better with 
the circular approach? 
259

Figure5.3 The bio 
cycle applies to consumption 
products; the technical cycle 
Toolkit connection 
The product service system 
| 
model focuses on the 
marketing of services rather 
than products. The provider 
retains ownership of the 
product and is responsible 
for ongoing maintenance, 
upgrade, and disposal at the 
end of the useful life, 
Conceptual understanding: 
Sustainability 
One element that feeds 
into the overall concept 
of sustainability is that of 
‘climate neutrality’ According 
to the European Parliament, 
this means 'having a balance 
between emitting carbon and 
absorbing carbon from the 
atmosphere’, achieving net 
Zerg emissions. 
The 2015 
Paris Agreement 
states the need to achieve 
climate neutrality this century 
Steps toward this include 
energy efficiency, renewable 
energies, green transport, 
biomass fueled power, carbon 
capture and storage (CCS), 
and a greater emphasis on the 
circular economy. Adopting 
a cradle to cradle design and 
manufacturing approach 
will help organizations 
accomplish this wider goal. 
260 
Operations management 
a 
Production \ 
A 
\ 
Plants 
/‘ 
BIOLOGICAL CYCLE 
} 
for consumption products 
Biological 
nutrient \ 
TG« e 
Biodegradation 
= 
(=} 
Pmdudion\ 
TECHNICAL CYCLE 
e 
=0 
for service products 
B 
Disassembly 
¥ 
g B 
Takeback 
e} 
mtE 
o //_Ha 
- 
Technical 
nutrient 
It describes the safe and potentially infinite circulation of materials and nutrients in 
cycles. All constituents are chemically harmless and recyclable. Waste as we know it 
today, generated according to the take-make-waste model, will no longer exist. 
C2C advocates for two cycles to be followed in relation to consumption products and 
service products: the biological cycle for the former, and the technical cycle for the latter. 
Consumables like natural fibers, cleaning agents, and biodegradable packaging 
circulate in a biological cycle that they can be safely reintroduced to after use. They 
turn into compost or other materials, which are in turn used to make new products. 
Therefore, old products do not turn into waste but into ‘nutrients’ for a new product. 
Consumer goods such as electronic items circulate in a technical cycle. These products 
are already optimized during the design and manufacturing process as material 
resources for their next service life as new products. Components can be sorted 
according to their constituent materials after use and then reintroduced to a technical 
cycle. High quality is maintained and downcycling can be prevented. 
Visit the Ellen MacArthur Foundation website and investigate 
what is meant by the circular economy. 
Working in small groups, develop a presentation you could 
deliver to the school community to promote the benefits of 
adopting this mindset and pointing people toward ways in 
which they can limit the waste they produce. 
Quality control and quality assurance 
Quality is vital to the success of a business. Quality is the degree to which a product or 
service meets the specific requirements of customers. 
If 
a business can produce and distribute high-quality products or services, then it is 
more likely to succeed. Ensuring quality helps to build a good reputation and increase 
customer loyalty. Two aspects of quality management are quality assurance and 
quality control (Table 5.1).

Table 5.1 The differences between quality assurance and quality control 
Quality assurance 
Quality control 
Main objective is to prevent defects and 
mistakes 
Main objective is to fix defects after first 
identifying them 
Preventive technique and proactive 
measures 
Corrective technique and reactive 
measures 
Process-oriented: directly related to 
the systematic and planned activities 
involved in making the product 
Product-oriented: related to operational 
activities and techniques that are used to 
inspect and ensure that requirements of 
quality have been met 
Involves managing quality by defining 
the processes, strategies, and policies, 
developing checklists, and establishing 
Involves following the set guidelines as 
the project progresses and products are 
being made to verify quality, discover 
standards that need to be followed 
defects and correct them 
throughout the course of the project 
Responsibility of all the individuals 
involved in developing the product or 
service 
Responsibility of a particular team that 
tests the product or service to check for 
bugs and fixes them 
Statistical tools and techniques applied to 
end products are referred to as Statistical 
Quality Control (SQC) and are part of 
quality assurance 
Statistical tools and techniques applied 
to processes are referred to as Statistical 
Process Control (SPC) and are part of 
quality control 
Quality assurance is process-oriented, and it focuses on preventing quality issues. 
It provides confidence both internally to management and externally to customers, 
government agencies, regulators, certifiers, and third parties. 
Quality control is product-oriented and focused on identifying quality issues in 
manufactured products that could affect customer satisfaction. 
Ways of managing quality 
The importance of ensuring quality within an organization is critical, and a business 
needs to ensure that it has suitable systems in place to monitor and manage quality. 
There are several ways to do this, including quality circles, benchmarking, and total 
quality management (TQM). 
Quality circle 
A quality circle comprises employees who regularly meet to solve problems, improve 
the quality control of products, and facilitate high standards in the workplace. The 
scope of their work may include issues relating to the production process, material 
wastage, the quality of finished and semi-finished goods and raw materials, energy 
consumption, maintenance, safety, and delays. 
« 
Participation is voluntary, with the initiative to join resting with the interested 
employee. 
* The size of the group typically varies from eight to ten members, who belong to a 
specific work area. Specialists from other areas can be brought in to gain additional 
perspectives to find appropriate solutions. 
261

Figure 5.4 Thequality 
262 
* The quality circle members determine the frequency of meetings, usually at 
periodic intervals, such as weekly. 
* There may be several quality circles operating in the work environment; however, 
they do not interfere with each other. 
* The quality circle collects and analyzes data, then through discussions comes to a 
solution. The final idea is presented to the management by the group and not the 
leader alone. 
A simple quality circle process can be seen in Figure 5.4. 
Benchmarking 
Benchmarking is defined as a process of measuring an organization’s products, 
services, and processes against those of organizations known to be leaders in one or 
more aspects of their operations. This enables an organization to discover if thereis a 
gap in performance that can be closed. 
Benchmarking helps an organization understand how it compares to similar 
organizations, even if they are in a different business or have a different group of 
customers. 
Figure 5.5 could represent an airline that is looking at its performance in terms of 
the average check-in time at a particular airport compared with that of its major 
competitor. Once the benchmark gap (the difference between the airline’s current 
performance and that of the market leader) has been identified, the organization 
will aim to put in place procedures that will close the gap. In time, the airline’s goal 
will be to surpass that benchmark and become an industry leader with superior 
performance.

Superior performance 
Industry best practice 
Benchmark gap 
™\ 
Function being measured 
1/ 
Performance 
Time 
Total quality management 
TQM is a management framework based on the principle that an organization can 
build long-term success by having all its members, from low-level workers to its 
senior executives, focus on improving quality, therefore helping to improve customer 
satisfaction. This requires empowerment of all workers in the organization, so they are 
free to contribute to and support this approach. 
TQM requires organizations to focus on continuous improvement, adopting the 
kaizen approach. Long-term process improvements are the goal as opposed to short- 
term financial gains. As well as kaizen, other aspects of lean production will figure in 
this TQM approach such as the use of benchmarking and quality circles. 
The principles of TQM 
* Customer first: Providing an unrivaled customer experience in all interactions 
with the organization is at the forefront of the TQM framework and philosophy;, 
and stands as the foremost pillar of success. The customer is always the main 
priority, from purchase through to after sales support. 
Customer first 
Constant 
improvement 
Based on 
process 
Data-driven 
\ 
Communication 
System 
integration 
<« Figure5.5 The benchmark 
< 
gap 
Figure 5.6 The principles 
of TOM 
263

264 
Operations management 
Employee ownership: The TQM approach is all encompassing and requires the 
involvement of every team member to ensure that complete quality control is 
offered at every level. No single department is targeted, as the goal is to provide 
customers with a great experience from every level of the organization. 
Process-based: TQM focuses on the creation and implementation of processes 
that provide organizations with the ability to find success and repeat it. 
Quantifying success and defining the steps taken to get there are essential for 
successful implementation of TQM. 
System integration: Complete cooperation is sought across the organization 
through system integrations and leveraging every asset available. 
Communication: Communication and transparency is critical when adopting 
a TQM approach, as it requires every employee to be on board and add value to 
the team. 
Data-driven: Decisions are based on quantifiable facts through the leveraging of 
data to improve the organization. Guesswork and emotional responses will not aid 
this process. 
Constant improvement: TQM is an ongoing process that strives for perfection in 
how the organization operates. Although perfection is impossible, getting as close 
to it as feasible is the goal. 
The impact of lean production and TQM 
Adopting lean production methods and a TQM approach bring both advantages 
and disadvantages. 
Advantages 
Eliminates waste: Lean principles aim to minimize all forms of waste, from 
product defects to inefficiencies in the work environment. Whether it’s eliminating 
defects, installing better lighting, or rearranging the workspace, eliminating waste 
will translate into cost savings down the line. 
Worker satisfaction: Employees usually respond in a positive way to conscious 
efforts to involve them in improvement processes. When they see suggestions and 
ideas incorporated, a sense of ownership and satisfaction about their contribution 
is more likely to follow. 
Relationship building: Close interactions with suppliers are a feature of lean 
production approaches, while considering customers and working with employees 
are essential to TQM. 
Just-in-time: ]IT is a strategy that suggests large inventories are wasteful of 
company resources. Moving toward having the raw materials purchased and 
delivered when production needs them, and then the finished product is sold 
and delivered the moment it comes off the line, ensures equity isn’t tied up 
unnecessarily. 
Competitive advantage: Implementing lean production techniques and TQM 
introduces systems and develops skills that support changes in the workplace. 
Employees become nimbler in their approach, by producing work quickly, in short 
iterations, without waste, and delivering on time, which provides an advantage 
over the competition.

Disadvantages 
» New inefficiencies: Lean techniques can be overused, and when tracking of 
productivity and waste starts to impact the time used for production, the solution 
becomes the problem. 
» Low margin for error: Being overly aggressive with JIT scheduling can leave a 
business vulnerable to systemic bottlenecks. Supplier delivery issues may cut off 
raw materials, interrupting production flow, and maintenance emergencies can 
reduce the production levels. 
» Worker frustration: Using lean methods to squeeze more economy from 
production can discourage workers, leading to demotivation and undermining 
the leadership. 
» Changing corporate culture: The culture within an organization can take time to 
embrace lean production and TQM philosophy. 
* 
Training costs: Relevant training and development costs will need to be accounted 
for to enable employees to adapt to new processes. 
National and international quality standards 
If 
a business provides poor quality goods and services, it is unlikely that it will survive 
long against its competitors. In addition, it can be costly as the business will have to 
deal with the return of goods or spend time and money rectifying problems. 
Therefore, businesses will often look to adopt and abide by national and international 
quality standards. These provide certification and a mark of quality assurance to 
indicate that a minimum standard has been met in the production and provision of 
goods to customers. 
The most well-known quality standards are provided by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO). ISO standards were created to offer 
guidance, coordination, simplification, and unification of criteria to companies and 
organizations to reduce costs and increase effectiveness, as well as to standardize 
product and service standards across the globe. 
I1SO standards have been developed and adopted by many companies in many 
countries out of a need and willingness to standardize quality parameters. The 
ISO produces documents of required standards, specifications, guidelines, or 
characteristics that can be used by companies to ensure that materials, products, 
processes, and services are suitable for their purpose. Additionally, ISO ensures that 
these requirements are accepted in all member countries, to ensure standardization. 
ISO 9000 is a quality management standard that presents guidelines intended to 
increase business efficiency and customer satisfaction. The goal of ISO 9000 is to 
embed a quality management system within an organization, increasing productivity, 
reducing unnecessary costs, and ensuring quality of processes and products. 
The International 
Standardization 
Organization (15O} is an 
independent, non- 
governmental international 
organization with a 
membership of 167 
national standards bodies. 
It brings together experts 
to share knowledge and 
develop consensus- 
based, market relevant 
international standards that 
support innovation and 
provide solutions to new 
global challenges. 
In London, in 1946, 
65 delegates from 25 
countries met to discuss 
the future of international 
standardization. In 1947, 
1SO officially came into 
existence with &7 technical 
committees (groups of 
experts focusing on a 
specific subject). 
Online resources 
Visit the About us’ section on 
the ISO website and follow the 
story of how the ISO came to 
be what it is today. 
DEH0 
. 
265

