Operations management 
Practice questions 
1 Outline the features of lean production. 
(2 marks) 
2 Define the term ‘benchmarking’. 
(2 marks) 
3 Describe two features of quality circles. 
(4 marks) 
4 Distinguish between quality control and quality assurance. 
(4 marks) 
5 The Coca-Cola Company is an example of an organization that adopts a TQM 
approach. On its website, under product quality and safety, it states: 
Food safety is integral to our gold standard of quality. Our fundamental 
responsibility is to ensure safety standards for the products we produce and 
distribute. Safety and product quality are a fundamental part of our product 
design, manufacturing and proactive consumer feedback processes. Our robust 
supplier requirements program is intended to ensure quality throughout the 
supply chain. 
We promote a culture of caring and safe behavior, reaching beyond compliance 
to ensure continuous improvement through hazard identification and 
implementation of controls to minimize risk. 
Our high standards are set so a quality product can be enjoyed around the 
world. We demand our standards and policies are met for all products we serve. 
This includes globally recognized standards, local regulatory needs, and where 
needed, establishing our own standards to protect consumers. 
We promote continuous improvement through innovation and collaboration 
with industry and partners. We have a continual program for audit and 
measuring. 
Examine the impact of adopting TQM practices for The Coca-Cola 
Company. 
(10 marks) 
5.4 Location 
| Learningoutcomes 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
» explain the reasons and impacts of location and relocation decisions for 
businesses, both nationally and internationally 
» 
discuss ways of reorganizing production, both nationally and internationally. 
The late Lord Harold Samuel, a real estate tycoon in the UK, said: ‘There are three 
things that matter in property: location, location, location.’ Location is the single most 
important factor in the value of a house. 
Likewise, choosing where to locate is one of the most important decisions a business 
will face. For a business start-up, this will be where to set up for the first time, 
whereas an existing business may be looking to move to a new location and relocate 
266

its operations. The decision to relocate can be driven by several reasons, such as 
changing external factors, expansion needs of the business, market trends, or the 
result of a merger. 
Choice of production location 
The reasons outlined here are by no means exhaustive but provide an overview of 
some of the key factors relating to location or relocation. 
Cost 
At the forefront of the location decision is likely to be the costs involved. The key costs 
will fall under the following categories. 
Land: The type of land and space required by the business varies by the nature of 
the activity involved. Manufacturing firms will need space and may look toward 
suburban areas where cost per square foot is relatively less expensive. Warehousing 
firms need to locate close to suitable communication hubs and distribution 
networks. The retail end of the business will need to be where the customers are 
and city center locations may be preferred. 
Labor: Wage rates and skill levels will be important, and both will differ from 
region to region. 
Transport: Depending on whether the business is producing large or small 
physical products, it’s essential to consider transport costs. 
o A business may be taking a bulk-gaining approach, with finished items being 
larger than its components. For example, a firm producing narrowboats would 
make sense to locate next to the canals they will be cruising on. 
o If the business is adopting a bulk-reducing approach, whereby the finished 
items are smaller than its raw materials, it makes economic sense to locate the 
manufacturing process close to the source of the raw materials to minimize 
transport costs. For example, a sawmill will want to be close to the source of 
its timber. 
Linked industries: Some businesses will want to be close to similar industries 
to benefit from a customer base and external economies of concentration. When 
firms within the same industry cluster together, they can take advantage of the 
existing infrastructure and supply networks. Moreover, skilled workers tend to 
shift close to such clusters for work, thereby giving firms easy availability to labor. 
The cost of locating in these regions may then come at a premium. 
Suppliers 
Being close to good local suppliers may be a factor, more so if the business is adopting 
a JIT method of production, whereby closeness of suppliers will help to reduce lead 
times on the production of final products. 
Infrastructure and accessibility 
Infrastructure includes all aspects of transport and communication networks in the 
area, as well as facilities that support industry, such as healthcare, education, utilities 
such as water and energy, housing, and policing. 
If the business relies on frequent deliveries, then it’s important to consider local 
transport links, particularly main roads and motorways, but also rail, water, and air. 
267

Operations management 
Property rental and purchase prices are often steeper in higher density, more 
commercialized areas, so there are certainly cost benefits to seeking a more out-of-town 
location. Equally, ease of commuting for employees is an important consideration, so 
ensuring your location is accessible by car, public transport, cycling, and walking is 
important. A good location is often a critical factor in recruiting the right people into 
the business, particularly if they are choosing between two or more job opportunities. 
DHL is a global leader in the logistics industry. Specializing in international 
shipping, courier services, and transportation. DHL connects people in over 
220 countries and territories worldwide. Driven by the power of more than 
380,000 employees, it delivers integrated services and tailored solutions 
for managing and transporting letters, goods, and information. 
Research the logistics and supply chain management of DHL: focus on how location 
factors play an important part in their business operation. 
To support your research, check out the various insightful videos on YouTube. 
Produce a 300-400 word summary of your key findings. 
Competition 
Establishing which competitors are in the area and what they are offering could help 
inform the choice about the right location. If there is too much competition, then it may 
be a warning sign to look elsewhere. However, there are exceptions to this, such as car 
dealerships who like to be near each other as customers compare and choose the best car 
deal. Likewise, if the business has an element that is unique or offers an innovation, then 
choosing an area that already has a ripe market could be the ideal way to pick up customers 
very quickly and establish a presence in a new area in a relatively short timeframe. 
Case study - Savile Row, London 
The most important street in menswear is Savile 
Row in London. It's a modest row of the men’s 
tailors that make the best bespoke and made-to- 
measure suits in the world. 
Built between 1731 and 1735, Savile Row today 
houses 21 individual tailors, some of which 
have been there well over a century. The street is 
renowned as the birthplace of bespoke tailoring, and as a result people flock there 
to experience a service like no other. 
268

The know-how and expertise of the craftsmen in Savile Row is unprecedented, and 
this has been recognized by countless icons over the years, including Sir Winston 
Churchill, Lord Nelson, and Prince Philip, who were regulars. 
Each and every tailor on the street is different, with some rooted in the oldest of 
traditions and others part of the ‘New Establishment’. 
The street became known as the home of handcrafted British bespoke tailoring. 
But since the start of the 21st century, an influx of international designer labels 
has opened up the street’s offering to include ready-to-wear and made-to-measure 
suiting. 
Evaluate the decision by international designer labels to open their stores alongside 
the established Savile Row tailors. 
Government 
National and local governments can play an important part in a business’ decision 
to locate or relocate in a certain area. Government can take on extra significance for 
those businesses looking to locate in an area earmarked for redevelopment that may 
currently be deprived and suffering from high levels of unemployment. 
In this situation, a government may offer subsidies and attractive location packages to 
incentivize businesses to set up in the area. Subsidies are payments to firms that can be 
offset against the costs of production. Tax rebates or reductions may also be offered. 
Businesses also must consider the range of laws they are subject to and impacted by, 
such as health and safety legislation, labor laws, and any that may be linked to planning 
or future development of the land. 
The taxes a business must pay will also feed into location decisions. For example, in 
the U.S.A. in 2020, top corporate income tax rates ranged from 2.5 per cent in North 
Carolina to 12 per cent in lowa. 
Workforce 
A business needs to find out about the skill 
base in the location it is considering and 
whether it will fulfill its needs. Employment 
rates are an important indicator of both 
skills and wage levels. If 
a business relies 
on skilled workers, it is best to go to 
where there is a healthy bank of talent. 
As employees are often a business’ biggest asset, choosing a location lacking in 
required talent will limit a business’ success. 
Potential for growth 
Will the premises be able to accommodate business growth or a spike in demand? Moving 
premises is a big upheaval and can be time-consuming and costly. Therefore, a business 
must know whether it is choosing a short- or long-term location. A premises’ flexibility 
could be a very important factor regarding its suitability for future business needs. 
IB learner profile 
Communicators 
Imagine you are looking to 
open a franchise of a well- 
known restaurant chain. As part 
of the application process, you 
are required to pitch a potential 
location to the franchiser for 
where you plan to open the 
business. Create your location 
pitch to convince the franchiser 
why you believe the location 
you have chosen will help lead 
to success as a franchise outlet. 
269

Operations management 
Reorganizing production 
Driven by changes in internal or external factors, a business may need to reorganize its 
production activities. To fulfill certain aspects of their production process or non-core 
activities, a business may use: 
* 
outsourcing 
* 
subcontracting 
* offshoring 
* 
insourcing 
* reshoring. 
Outsourcing 
Outsourcing is the process of permanently allocating whole departments or jobs to an 
external firm. Outsourced tasks tend to be those processes that internal staff can perform 
but cannot because of time or people limitations. By having a third party perform the 
work instead of internal employees, it can lessen the firm’s labor costs. Functions in sales, 
customer service, business development, and accounting can be outsourced. 
Table 5.2 Advantages and disadvantages of outsourcing 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Outsourcing can free up the business to 
focus on its strengths, allowing staff to 
concentrate on their main tasks and on 
future strategy. 
There is a risk that delivery may be 
delayed or below expectations, which 
might damage the business’ image. 
Choosing an outsourcing company 
that specializes in the process or service 
needed helps the business achieve a 
more productive, efficient service, often 
of greater quality. 
Confidentiality and security might be at 
risk as the outsourced company could 
jeopardize the confidentiality of data 
provided to them. 
Cost savings achieved by outsourcing 
can help release capital for investment in 
other areas of the business. 
An outsourcing contract could prove 
too rigid to accommodate change. 
Outsourcing can give access to 
capabilities and facilities otherwise not 
accessible or affordable. 
Changes at the outsourcing company 
could lead to friction and management 
difficulties. 
Outsourcing can help leverage 
knowledge and skills for a greater 
competitive advantage. 
The outsourcing company could go out 
of business. 
Subcontracting 
Subcontracting is the process of hiring an individual or company to complete a specific, 
usually specialized task that cannot be completed by the current in-house employees. 
Unlike outsourcing, subcontracting does not permanently assign departments or jobs to the 
third party, making it a temporary arrangement. Once the terms of the contract have been 
completed then the arrangement ends. However, it is common for firms to subcontract to 
the same third-party firms for future needs if they are happy with the work completed. 
270

The two parties work closely together throughout the project, although the hiring 
party retains sufficient control over the entire process. This process is common in 
the construction industry, where building firms may subcontract to plumbing and 
electrical specialists. 
Table 5.3 Advantages and disadvantages of subcontracting 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Businesses can hire a contractor when 
more flexibility is needed with a specific 
job or task. 
Contractors may cost the business 
more than the equivalent daily rate for 
employing someone. 
Subcontracting can be used for one- 
off jobs and jobs requiring specialist 
expertise or fast turnaround. 
By relying on contractors, the business 
does not acquire or develop skills in- 
house. 
It enables staff 
to concentrate on the 
core business. 
Internal staff may resent contractors 
being paid more money for doing 
similar work to them. 
Some contractors can start the work or 
project at short notice, even when large 
numbers of workers are required. 
If the business uses a contractor which 
then uses a subcontractor, the business 
has no direct control over the quality of 
subcontractors’ work. 
A business can specify the type and 
duration of contract needed for the 
contracted job. 
Contractors may not appreciate the 
business culture and may lack the 
motivation and commitment of internal 
staff. 
Subcontracting allows a business to 
obtain temporary cover for a permanent 
post or a work project. 
Offshoring 
Offshoring is essentially a geographic activity. In what can be termed the Western 
developed world, goods are more expensive as the staff required to produce and 
distribute them are costly. By contrast, in the developing world, readily available, 
large, inexpensive pools of labor provide an enticing foundation for a low-cost 
economy. 
Offshoring is the process that takes advantage of these cost differentials. By 
relocating production facilities from costly countries to less expensive countries, 
the firm can then sell goods back in the developed countries at a discount, while 
helping to ensure a healthy profit. Technological improvements, along with decades 
of productive offshoring, have helped lower the costs of consumer goods such 
as electronics and clothing. In addition, offshoring is also common in the service 
sector. The Indian IT sector has particularly benefited as Western companies have 
set up their call center services in the region to deal with technical queries and 
customer service issues. The UK banking sector was one such industry that took 
advantage of this. 
Conceptual understanding: 
Ethics 
Multinationals (MNCs) have 
adopted offshoring as a popular 
practice, often looking at 
emerging markets as attractive 
locations. Economic benefits are 
the driving force in this decision. 
However, it can also involve 
several ethical issues, such as 
environmental pollution, poor 
working conditions, and use of 
child labor, 
271

2r2 
Operations management 
Table 5.4 Advantages and disadvantages of offshoring 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Offshoring production means the 
business has access to a greater pool of 
skilled labor. 
Other countries may have different rules 
and regulations for the quality of products 
being produced. This can cause problems 
if the countries where production is 
being offshored have less stringent 
requirements for product quality. 
When offshoring operations, the workload 
of current employees reduces, allowing 
them to focus on areas of development. 
Although the initial appeal of offshoring 
can be due to the low labor costs of 
other countries, those costs may rise. 
Offshoring processes to other countries 
allows the business to work closely with 
professionals who can help market their 
products to a new audience. 
Sharing information between systems 
and locations increases the risk of a 
security breach. This could lead to data 
leaks or loss of data which can be costly 
to the company. 
Low labor costs allow for lower 
prices, which improve the business’ 
competitiveness. 
When physical infrastructures are 
moved overseas, local employees may 
lose their jobs if they are not able to work 
in other areas of the company. This can 
negatively impact the local perception of 
the company if a lot of people lose their 
jobs because of offshoring. 
Insourcing 
[nsourcing is when work that would otherwise have been contracted out is performed 
in-house. Insourcing often involves bringing in specialists to fill temporary needs or 
training existing personnel to perform tasks that would otherwise have been outsourced. 
Table 5.5 Advantages and disadvantages of inshoring 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Direct control over the entire 
development process. 
Limited expertise as the business may 
have a small pool of experts who can 
work on the project. 
Easy access to the team doing the job. 
The business may need to manage the 
training and improvement of the team 
to enhance their skillset and technical 
abilities. 
There are no communication issues, 
which may arise while working with 
remote teams. 
Company culture ensures that 
employees see the bigger picture and 
are dedicated to the company’s growth. 
They share the same vision and values, 
which makes cooperation easier. 

Reshoring 
Reshoring is the opposite of offshoring and involves the act of bringing back 
offshored manufacturing and other types of jobs to a company’s home country. 
Several American and European companies moved their manufacturing facilities 
and service centers to Asia in search of lower costs. However, rising wages, 
increasing manufacturing costs offshore, and delayed design/manufacture to 
market times are forcing many companies to consider bringing jobs back home. 
Many governments are keen to encourage rcshoring, because it would boost 
employment and provide young adults with better job prospects. 
Table 5.6 Advantages and disadvantages of reshoring 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Reshoring restores some control back 
Bringing supply chain operations 
to supply chain managers. Rather than 
back from abroad and reclaiming 
relying entirely on foreign suppliers to 
control over production comes with 
determine how and when products are | increased complexity and costs. 
manufactured, companies that reshore 
Companies typically must invest in new 
operations can use the opportunity to be | infrastructure. 
more selective when choosing suppliers. 
Reshoring can also reduce lead times 
Companies that reshore often forego 
when the right stakeholders are 
important comparative advantages. 
involved. Products don't spend months | They break ties with specialty partners 
in transit crossing vast oceans or get 
who are better equipped to handle 
stuck in ports as the result of massive 
certain types of orders. 
shipping container shortages. 
Reshoring can produce a smaller 
environmental footprint compared to 
outsourcing. 
Case study - British Telecom (BT) 
In 2016, BT announced that it planned to recruit 1,000 
staff in the UK after customers complained that they 
- 
did not like speaking to staff in Indian call centers. 
BT \ 
The group said it would ensure that at least 80 per cent 
of calls were answered from the UK by the end of 2016, 
up from more than 50 per cent previously as it was 
embarking on a reshoring strategy. 
The telecoms giant pledged to spend £80m to improve its customer service, ranked 
by the regulator, Ofcom, as among the worst in the industry. 
The changes began in Swansea, with a further 100 staff hired for BT’s South Wales 
center. The remaining jobs have been spread around BT’s 20 call centers throughout 
the UK. It planned to add another 1,000 staff in 2017. 
The recruitment drive followed reports from customers that they preferred 
speaking to people in UK call centers rather than Indian staff based in Bengaluru 
and Delhi. BT said the new jobs would be ‘frontline roles’ in customer care. 
273

