5.6 Production planning 
| Leamingoutomes 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this unit, you will be able to: 
+ 
explain what the local and global supply chain may look like for an organization 
* 
contrast just-in-time (JIT) and just-in-case (JIC) production planning methods 
+ 
analyze a stock control chart, and label lead time, buffer stock, reorder level, and 
reorder quantity 
* 
calculate and comment on the capacity utilization rate of an organization 
* 
calculate and comment on the labor productivity, capital productivity, 
productivity rate, and operating leverage of an organization 
+ 
evaluate a cost to buy (CTB) and cost to make (CTM) decision for an organization. 
With the increasing complexity of the manufacturing industry due to the diversity 
of products and services created in a globalized world, it has become ever more 
competitive. Material requirements planning, supply chain management, inventory 
control, employees, and physical space where the manufacturing happens need due 
consideration, requiring companies to carry out thorough production planning. 
Production planning describes the process of deciding how a product or service will be 
manufactured before the actual production commences. 
Supply chains 
A supply chain is the network of all the individuals, organizations, resources, activities, 
and technology involved in the creation and sale of a product. A supply chain 
encompasses everything from the delivery of raw materials from the supplier to the 
manufacturer through to its eventual delivery to the end consumer. 
When it comes to developing the supply chain, a business has the option to stay local 
or look globally. 
Local 
Local sourcing refers to the sourcing of products or materials from suppliers within 
the home country. 
Sourcing local can often come at a higher price than if the business were to look 
globally. However, local sourcing can be easier and faster. If the business needs a quick 
turnaround, it might make sense to source from a local supplier who can produce 
products and deliver within a certain timeframe, rather than taking shipping times 
into account. For example, a UK boat builder may source locally grown timber for the 
carpentry aspects of the build as it is readily available nearby, with a short delivery time. 
There is an argument that more businesses should support their local economy by 
sourcing products and services from local suppliers; however, the reality is that this isn’t 
always possible. Each country has its own resources and expertise and to advance in 
business, it’s important to source products from high-quality and reliable suppliers, even 
if they are based overseas. Trying to source locally when the country is not as skilled in 
developing the products the business needs can cause a competitive disadvantage. 
287

288 
Operations management 
Global 
Global sourcing refers to the practice of sourcing from the global supply chain for 
raw materials, components, goods, and services across geopolitical boundaries. This 
procurement strategy is something businesses all over the world use, as international 
sourcing can help save businesses money by finding cost-effective locations to source 
and manufacture goods. For example, a bathroom and plumbing showroom in France 
may source bathroom fittings from The People’s Republic of China, where there are 
major sanitary industry production bases in Guangdong, Fujian, and Zhejiang. 
A regenerative supply chain is a concept that is becoming more prevalent in the 
world of business. 
The regenerative supply chain first accounts for its negative impacts such as carbon, 
waste, and resources use. It then seeks to restore, replenish, and ultimately 
regenerate more resources than it requires, resulting in a net benefit to people and 
the planet. 
Conduct some research into this concept. What examples can you find of this 
approach in practice? 
Just-in-time and just-in-case 
There are two key approaches to stock control for an organization. Just-in-time is 
considered the newer of the two (appearing after World War 1I), whereas just-in-case is 
seen as the more traditional approach. 
Just-in-time (JIT) 
The central idea with JIT stock management is that companies order products 
and stock to meet customer demand. Stock levels are intended to mirror actual 
consumption levels to minimize waste. By only ordering necessary stock the business 
benefits from low storage costs, allowing it to invest capital into other areas of the 
business. For this to work, there must be an issue-free supply chain, supported by 
accurate demand forecasting. 
Advantages of JIT 
* 
Itreduces costs in production by reducing the need for storage or warehousing. As 
the exact amount of materials needed for the immediate production schedule are 
ordered, expenditure is optimized. 
 Shorter production runs can be implemented as production is based on current 
demand. This also helps to maximize production capacity. 
* Output is based on projected demand: this reduces the issues of excess and unsold 
products in the market, again reducing storage and carrying costs. 
Disadvantages of JIT 
 Accurate demand forecasting is not easy. Businesses need to have strong 
capabilities in analyzing and forming conclusions around market trends, 
dcvclopmcnts in relevant industries and sectors, and gauging consumer sentiment. 
* Asthe global supply chain has become ever more interconnected, any problems 
in the supply chain can create knock-on impacts at subsequent stages, leaving a 
business vulnerable to delays and missed orders.

Just-in-case (JIC) 
Adopting a JIC stock management system means a more cautious approach compared 
to JIT. With JIC, businesses build up a buffer or safety stock of items, so that they can 
quickly respond to unexpected demand surges. The business still needs to anticipate 
demand but will add on extra quantities ‘just-in-case’. A JIC approach works well 
where demand is volatile or if there is supply chain disruption. 
Advantages of JIC 
* The additional stock can be used to meet any unexpected demand surges or 
mitigate supply chain disruption, such as increased delivery times or suppliers that 
have run out of certain stocks (known as a stockout). 
* 
Having the right stock available could be more profitable in the long run. It can generate 
more sales and gain a competitive advantage if competitors hit a stock out. These additional 
sales could balance the increase in carrying costs and capital invested in buffer stock. 
* 
Being able to respond to market changes quickly due to additional safety stock puts 
a business in a strong position to facilitate growth. 
Disadvantages of JIC 
» 
Carrying safety stock or increasing safety stock levels impacts carrying costs. For 
example, more stock takes up warehouse space, increases storage costs, and ties up 
capital that could be used elsewhere. 
« 
Stock with low turnover could date and become obsolete. This can mean either 
destroying it or selling it at a heavy discount. 
Stock control charts 
Stock control charts are an important aspect of inventory management and figure heavily 
with businesses that adopt a JIC approach. The overall goal of stock control is to maintain 
inventory levels at a point where the total costs of holding stocks are minimized. 
A stock control chart provides a visual representation of a firm’s inventory levels. This 
tool is used to monitor and analyze the rate at which stocks are used, when they need to 
be replenished, the distribution time, and delivery expectations. By using a stock control 
chart, an operations department can make better decisions on how to manage stock levels. 
--------- Maximum stock level 
= 
Order 
% 
quantity 
% 
BT 
Re-order level 
8 
) 
LT R 
e 
e e Minimum stock level 
Lead | 
Buffer 
0 
‘time! 
stock 
0 
Month 1 
Month2 
 Month 3 
Time 
The main features of a stock control chart (such as that in Figure 5.14) are: 
« Maximum stock level: This represents the maximum amount of stock the 
business wants to hold at any point in time, usually based on the capacity of its 
storage facilities. In Figure 5.14, the maximum stock level is 600 units. 
«f Figure5.14 Atypical stock 
control chart 
289

290 
Operations management 
»  Minimum stock level: This is the minimum amount of stock the business aims to 
always maintain. 
» Buffer stock: This is the stock available to use in case of an unexpected increase in 
demand from customers or counteract supply shocks that may cause late deliveries 
from suppliers. In Figure 5.14, there is buffer stock of 100 units. 
* Reorder level: This corresponds to the level of inventory reached that then 
triggers a reorder. 
* Reorder quantity: This is the amount of new stock ordered for production. In 
Figure 5.14, the reorder quantity is 500 units. 
* Lead time: This represents the time it takes from the placing of a stock order to 
receiving the delivery to the place of business. In Figure 5.14, the lead time is one week. 
» Usage rate: This is the speed at which stocks are used in the production process. 
In Figure 5.14, the usage rate for the business is 250 units every two weeks. 
Capacity utilization rate 
The capacity utilization rate measures the extent to which the business is realizing its 
potential output capacity. The figure is expressed as a percentage and can be calculated 
using this formula: 
actual output 
Capacity utilization = 
x 100 
potential output 
Let’s take an example of a small factory producing e-scooters. The factory size and 
production set up allows the manufacturer to produce 8,000 e-scooters per month. 
Currently, the factory output is 2,500 e-scooters per month. We can work out the 
capacity utilization using the formula above. 
g 
g 
500 
Capacity utilization = it 100 
=0.3125 x 100 
=31.25% 
Excess or spare capacity is when a firm’s output is below the maximum possible 
output, such in the example above. This can represent a waste of resources as the 
organization is spending unnecessarily on its fixed assets. 
A sensible capacity utilization target is 90 per cent: resources are being used more 
fully, while the business still has the flexibility to have machine downtime and 
maintenance, and to meet sudden increases in demand. 
Conversely, a capacity shortage is when a firm’s capacity is not large enough to deal 
with the level of demand for its products. This can lead to disappointed customers 
through delays and loss of sales to competitors. 
Defect rate 
Tracking the number of defective products produced helps a business to determine 
the financial losses these defects cause. In addition, tracking this helps businesses to 
measure the overall quality of each product and the production process. 
The defect rate is a measurement of how many units of production are defective out of 
a specific number of observed units. It can be calculated using this formula: 
Defect rate :ﬂ 
% 100 
output tested

Let’s take an example of a business producing scented candles. The candle business 
may decide to calculate the defect rate in its next production run of 1,500 scented 
candles. After the production run, 18 candles were defective. Using the defect rate 
formula, we can calculate the defect rate as below: 
18 
Defect rate = 
x 100 
1500 
=0.012 x 100 
=1.2% 
While lower rates are ideal, there’s no standard acceptable defect rate across industries. 
So companies must decide what their target defect rate is. 
Defect rate is important because it helps businesses determine how many units per output 
fail quality testing. This can help a business identify any problems in quality testing or 
production, and determine how much each defect costs. Companies can also compare 
defect rates among similar or different products to determine product profitability. 
Productivity and leverage 
Productivity refers to how well an organization converts input (such as labor, 
materials, machinery, and capital) into output (goods and services). There are several 
productivity measures that a business can calculate. 
Labor productivity 
Labor productivity is the measure of how much output is produced per unit of labor 
input. It can be calculated using the following formula: 
output per period (units 
Labor productivity = 
utput 
penpetiod 
furits) 
number of employees at work 
Let’s take an example of a pottery business. If the pottery firm produces 2,700 terracotta 
pots per week and it employs 15 people, the labor productivity rate would be: 
Labor productivity = 2700 
= 180 units per worker per week 
IB learner profile 
; 
e 
Caring 
Capltal prOdUCtNIty 
Labor productivity is a key 
Capital productivity is a measure of how well physical capital is used in the provision 
efficiency measure for a 
of goods and services. Physical capital includes office equipment, labor materials, 
Lol 
I s 
workplaces this figure is 
communicated in real time to 
employees. Some employees 
under these conditions have 
warehouse supplies, and transportation equipment, such as cars and trucks. 
Capital productivity is calculated using the following formula: 
voiced their concerns on how a 
Capital productivity _ total output 
con.stant reminder impacts on 
capital input 
their wellbeing. 
To what extent does knowledge 
A higher capital productivity number shows that physical capital is being used 
of real time labor productivity 
efficiently in the creation of goods and services while a lower capital productivity 
TS CTEdte @ Positive 
workplace environment? 
291 
number shows the opposite.

Operations management 
Productivity rate 
The productivity rate, therefore, measures the amount of output from each unit of 
input. The formula used is as follows: 
i 
total output 
Productivity rate = ——— 
total input 
Operating leverage 
Operating leverage measures a company’s fixed costs as a percentage of its total costs. 
It is used to evaluate the break-even point of a business, as well as the likely profit levels 
on individual sales. Let's look at two scenarios: one where an organization has high 
operating leverage, and another where it has low operating leverage. 
A web design company has substantial fixed costs in the form of web developer 
salaries but almost no variable costs associated with each incremental software sale. 
This means the business has a high operating leverage. 
A business consulting firm charges its clients on an hourly basis. This incurs variable 
costs in the form of consultant wages. This firm has low operating leverage. 
Operating average can be calculated using the same data as break-even analysis: selling 
price, variable costs per unit, and fixed costs. Operating leverage can be calculated by 
using this formula: 
quantity x (price — variable cost per unit) 
Operating leverage = 
P 
g 
g 
quantity x (price 
— variable cost per unit) — fixed costs 
For example, Alaskan Barrel Company (ABC) has the following data: 
Variable costs = $30,000 
Fixed costs = $60,000 
Quantity of barrels produced = 1,000 
Price per barrel = $100 
With this data we can calculate the operating leverage for ABC: 
: 
. 
$30000 
Variable cost per unit = =000 
= $30 
1000 
x $70 
(1000 x $70) — $60000 
$70000 
"~ $70000— $60000 
_ $70000 
$10000 
=7 
Operating leverage = 
292

Table 5.11 shows the financial results for ABC. 
Table 5.11 The financial results for ABC ($) 
Revenue 
100 000 
Variable costs 
30 000 
Fixed costs 
60 000 
Net operating income 
10000 
ABC has a contribution margin of 70 per cent and net operating income of $10,000, 
which gives it a degree of operating leverage of 7. ABC’s sales then increase by 20 per 
cent, resulting in the results in Table 5.12. 
Table 5.12 ABC'’s financial results after a 20 per cent increase in sales 
Revenue 
120 000 
Variable costs 
36 000 
Fixed costs 
60 000 
Net operating income 
24000 
The contribution margin of 70 per cent has stayed the same, and fixed costs have not 
changed. Because of ABC’s high degree of operating leverage, the 20 per cent increase 
in sales translates into a more than doubling of its net operating income. 
High operating leverage 
In a high operating leverage situation, a large proportion of a company’s costs are fixed 
costs. In this case, the firm earns a large profit on each incremental sale but must attain 
sufficient sales volume to cover its substantial fixed costs. If it can do so, the entity will 
earn a major profit on all sales after it has covered its fixed costs. However, earnings 
will be more sensitive to changes in sales volume. 
For example, software companies have high fixed costs in terms of labor and capital 
equipment, and low variable costs. The major input in the production of software is skilled 
labor such as software and graphic designers. Thus, any increase in sales of software 
products will lead to high earnings and profits provided that fixed costs have been covered. 
Low operating leverage 
In a low operating leverage situation, a large proportion of a company’s sales are 
variable costs, so it only incurs these costs when there is a sale. In this case, the firm 
earns a smaller profit on each incremental sale but does not have to generate much sales 
volume to cover its lower fixed costs. It is easier for this type of company to earn a profit 
at low sales levels, but it does not earn outsized profits if it can generate additional sales. 
For example, supermarkets have low fixed costs to cover but high variable costs. Any 
increase in sales results in an increase in variable costs and not much increase in profits. 
How to use operating leverage 
When using the operating leverage measurement, constant monitoring of operating 
leverage is more important for a firm having high operating leverage, since a small 
percentage change in sales can result in a dramatic increase (or decrease) in profits. 
A firm must be especially careful to forecast its sales in these situations, since a small 
forecasting error translates into much larger errors in both net income and cash flows. 
& 
Supermarkets have high 
variable costs, with food prices 
being sensitive to external 
factors 
293

294 
Operations management 
Knowledge of the level of operating leverage can have a profound impact on pricing 
policy, since a company with high operating leverage must be careful not to set its prices 
so low that it can never generate enough contribution margin to fully offset its fixed costs. 
Cost to buy and cost to make 
A business may need to decide whether it should produce goods itself 
or buy those 
goods in. The results can influence the decision of whether to outsource production. It 
would not make sense for a business to produce a good if it can buy the same product 
for a lower price, and vice versa. 
The business will need to carry out cost to buy (CTB) and cost to make (CTM) 
calculations, using the following formulae: 
CTB = price x quantity 
CTM = fixed costs + (average variable costs x quantity) 
Let’s take an example of 
a camping and leisure business. Imagine the business is 
faced with a make or buy decision in relation to 5,000 camping chairs. They have the 
following financial information available: 
Costs to make themselves: 
Direct materials per chair = $4 
Direct labor = $3 
Variable factory overhead = $2 
Fixed factory overhead = $15,000 
CTM = $15000 + [($4 
+ $3 + $2) x 5000] 
= $15000 + ($9 x 5000) 
= $60000 
Costs to buy from supplier: 
Price per chair = $11 
CTB = $11 x 5000 
= $55000 
However, outside of the financial calculations that indicate whether the business 
should opt for CTM or CTB results, it may also consider additional factors before 
taking the final decision. These may include: 
¢ 
the quality of the finished product from both options 
» 
the impact on capacity utilization and ability to meet surges in demand 
* 
the reliability of suppliers 
» exchange rate movements if sourcing goods from a country with a different currency. 
Some qualitative aspects can influence the decision to buy or to make. Businesses may 
opt to make the product or component themselves due to the following factors: 
* A business maintains control over quality and costs if it owns production facilities 
along the supply chain, such as a coffee shop that has integrated with an organic 
coffee producer through a merger. In this case, the coffee shop has control over the 
quality and costs of coffee production.

» 
In many cases, businesses will choose to produce themselves instead of 
buying from suppliers to protect intellectual property, such as new technology 
development. For example, if a producer has developed a product that does not 
exist and is innovative, the producer will prefer to make it. 
» 
Social enterprises or businesses with strong corporate social responsibilities might 
choose to produce the product in case they cannot source suppliers committed 
to the same principles. For them the costs to make will not be a priority as they 
have different objectives, such as social welfare and supporting regenerative 
supply chains. 
Businesses might choose to buy the product or component due to the following 
factors: 
« 
If the business does not have the expertise to make the product but other 
businesses do, it will make sense to buy the product instead of trying to make it. 
o 
If the costs to make a product require huge capital investment, then businesses 
will opt for buying the product rather than making it. 
» A company may have been successfully producing a similar or the same product 
for a long time and has an established reputation on the market. Thus, it will make 
business sense to decide to buy the product and establish a long-term relationship 
with that company instead of trying to make the product. 
Case study - The Morgan Motor Company 
The Morgan Motor Company provides a fitting antidote to mass-produced 
automotive manufacturing, bringing with it an exceptional mix of traditional 
craftsmanship and appropriate modern technology. 
Famous the world over for its unique blend of craft, heritage and pure driving 
experience, the Morgan Motor Company has been manufacturing quintessentially 
British vehicles in Malvern, UK, for more than 110 years. 
With a team of 250 employees, each Morgan is hand crafted using three core 
elements: ash, aluminium and leather. Every car is entirely unique, built to the 
highest standards by passionate craftspeople, whose skills are handed down 
through generations and perfected over a lifetime, bringing together heritage, 
innovation and cutting-edge technology. 
Today, Morgan builds around 800 cars per year. There is still an unprecedented demand 
to own a new Morgan and this results in waiting lists for the cars. A six to twelve month 
waiting list is not uncommon; sometimes this can run to a couple of years. 
The factory has the capacity to produce 900 cars per year but an opportunity to 
expand the size of the factory could be an option. Purchasing the adjoining land to 
the current premises would allow the factory to accommodate the potential to build 
1,400 cars per year. 
The Morgan Motor Company also has a successful range of merchandise that fans of 
the brand can purchase, including t-shirts, caps, scarves, jackets, sweatshirts and 
beanies. Due to successful sales, it is now re-evaluating whether it should continue 
to buy branded products from a supplier or bring the production in-house. The 
details for the popular Morgan branded t-shirts are on the following page. 
295

