Operations management 
Average number of t-shirts sold per year: 6,000 
Cost to buy from supplier per t-shirt: £6 
The projected costs of in-house production of t-shirts are: 
Direct materials per t-shirt: £1.50 
Direct labor: £2 
Variable factory overhead: £2 
Fixed factory overhead: £7,000 
1 
Calculate the labor productivity per year for Morgan. 
2 
Calculate the capacity utilization rate of the current factory. 
3 
Comment on the potential opportunity for Morgan to expand its factory size. 
4 
Using data for the cost-to-buy and cost-to-make, along with information in 
the case study, recommend whether Morgan should bring the production of its 
branded t-shirts in-house. 
5.7 Crisis management and contingency 
planning 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this unit, you will be able to: 
* 
distinguish between crisis management and contingency planning 
* 
explain the factors that contribute to effective crisis management 
* 
evaluate the impact of contingency planning in a given context in terms of costs, 
time, risk, and safety. 
Contingency planning and crisis management 
are concepts that complement each other. 
Contingency planning is the process of 
preparing for potential emergencies while 
crisis management is the response to and 
management of emergencies when they 
do occur. 
With contingency planning, the business is 
trying to predict the possible emergencies 
before they could occur. A major element to that 
preparation is envisioning what all the potential emergencies could be. If a potential 
scenario was to play out with dire consequences, it is worth the business giving 
time and resources to prepare for its realization. Overlooking a possible category 
of emergency in the contingency planning phase can leave an organization poorly 
prepared when a crisis hits. 
296

Once potential scenarios have been identified, contingency planning involves 
setting the policies and procedures that will guide an organization through its 
crisis management function. This may involve the production of documents and 
other materials that outline the steps for responding to a crisis. It could also involve 
simulated exercises that put the crisis management team in a real-world scenario and 
pushes them to make decisions. Through conducting simulated exercises, weaknesses 
in the crisis management procedures can be identified and then rectified. 
When a crisis occurs, the organization’s crisis management plan activates. Successful 
crisis management involves all members of an organization working to limit the 
impact and damage of that crisis and to restore operations back to normal as quickly 
as possible. 
An actual crisis is unlikely to allow an exact step-by-step plan to be followed as 
businesses can only do so much to prepare. The various ways that real-world events 
diverge from the contingencies that an organization has prepared to face tests the 
decision-making capabilities of team members and the systems that are in place. 
Therefore, crisis management is a combination of planning and thriving under 
pressure. Crises that affect business can take many forms, such as natural disasters, 
environmental issues, cybersecurity threats, product recalls, employee misconduct, 
and conflict with interest groups. 
Factors that affect crisis management 
While in a crisis, an organization must be aware of certain factors that impact on 
the effectiveness of its crisis management response. By considering these factors, an 
organization is more likely to emerge from a crisis in good shape. 
Transparency 
The truth will always emerge, so it is important for the business to be transparent. 
To maintain brand integrity, a business must be proactive in its communications and 
admit fault when necessary. Apologies must come across as sincere. Saying something 
has gone, or been done, wrong is not easy, but it is a sign of strength and leadership 
that will help a business recover more quickly. The VW emissions scandal was one in 
which transparency was lacking from the start. 
Communication 
Communication is essential to crisis management strategy. It provides clarity and 
direction for employees, customers, and other stakeholders. Strategic communication 
stabilizes and advances the organization by inspiring confidence, earning trust, 
and engaging stakeholders. Clear, consistent communication is vital to successfully 
maintain business continuity and recover. 
Ready 
Respond 
Recover 
Restore 
<« Figure5.15 The role of 
communication in crisis 
management 
297

IB learner profile 
Caring 
Itis important, following a 
crisis, that a business is seen 
to care and not just attempt 
to save its reputation. Imagine 
that a multi-country Salmonella 
outbreak that affects 100 
people has been linked back 
to food products made at 
a confectionery factory you 
own. Draft a response from 
your company about the 
incident that conveys a caring 
approach - one which reassures 
customers that you are dealing 
with situation with the level of 
seriousness it deserves. 
298 
Operations management 
Ready 
During the Ready stage, communication lays the groundwork necessary for the 
organization to respond effectively and sustain trust. This phase happens during 
contingency planning. 
Respond 
When a crisis strikes, the organization moves to the Respond phase. At this 
point, strategic communication provides timely, accurate information that keeps 
stakeholders informed and helps to build trust. Authentic, transparent, and consistent 
messages help to maintain a company’s brand perception and retain loyal customers 
and employees. 
Recover 
During the Recover phase, the organization will start to stabilize. Strategic 
communication here will help provide clarity to stakeholders on how the future 
might look. Even if it starts to feel repetitive, proactive and consistent communication 
is vital during this phase because stakeholders may still feel uncertain, even as the 
organization is showing signs of stabilizing and recovering. 
Restore 
Using strategic communication in the Restore phase is an opportunity for an 
organization to re-align its communication to its purpose, mission, and values, and 
provide the rationale for any changes made because of the crisis. 
Speed 
Speed is key when it comes to crisis management, and actions should be taken in a 
timely manner. A nimble and fast organization can work its way through a crisis, 
taking minimal damage along the way, compared to a competitor that is slow off the 
mark. 
However, ‘knee jerk’ reactions that are not thought out can exacerbate a crisis further. 
Therefore, speed without direction isn’t enough. If the organization has a clear 
understanding of its values, with a robust chain of command in place, then it can 
establish a clear path out of the crisis and execute that plan rapidly. 
Control 
In a crisis, taking control is essential to prevent further damage from being inflicted 
through a worsening of the situation or unhelpful and inaccurate news being spread. 
Often, a crisis management team will be called on to take control and manage the 
response in accordance with the contingency plan. In the age of ‘viral’ news stories, it is 
important for control to be established as soon as possible. 
Itis at this point that direction is needed, and leadership reverts to becoming more 
autocratic in nature. The autocratic approach is more effective when a clearly defined 
crisis management protocol and contingency plan have been developed. In times of 
crisis, people are often more receptive to taking orders and direction to safely navigate 
through the situation.

Impacts on contingency planning 
Contingency planning requires a concerted effort from the organization to develop 
and there is no guarantee that it can be carried out effectively and efficiently until an 
actual crisis takes place. The following factors impact contingency planning. 
Cost 
Developing effective contingency planning involves a cost. The costs will depend on 
the time and level of expertise needed to formulate a plan. Often senior management 
will be involved and that will take them away from their everyday tasks. In addition, 
consultant fees can add up depending on the size and scale of 
a potential crisis. 
However, compared to the cost incurred of an actual crisis, the expenses to develop 
effective contingency plans may be trivial. 
As contingency plans need to be regularly reviewed and updated, there is an 
opportunity cost in terms of time and resources. Small businesses have no resources 
to afford this kind of planning; large corporations have teams of employees to only 
consider potential crisis situations and plan for those. The costs of insurance against 
natural disasters or dangers related to production, such as fire, injuries, and so on, also 
mount up. 
Time 
Contingency planning is a time-consuming process to complete. Depending on the 
nature of the external environment, which can be ever changing, contingency plans 
may need to be revisited on a regular basis. In addition, time must be considered in 
terms of the response time to a crisis: quick action must be taken to minimize the 
impact of a crisis. 
Risks 
The level and range of risks that need to be assessed depend on the field of business 
that the organization operates in. For example, a chemical spill in a chemical plant 
carries huge risks for employees and the local community. Communication and swift 
measures are crucial, as well as immediate actions to prevent the loss of life and spread 
of pollution. The risks can be minimized with effective contingency planning. 
Safety 
Throughout the contingency planning process, an organization needs to be mindful 
of the health and safety implications, and relevant legislation in place. It should 
consider that in times of crisis, such as fire, people can behave in a different way 
than during practices or drills. Failure to adhere to laws that govern health and 
safety at the workplace could result in large financial penalties and liabilities for the 
organization. 
It is not possible to predict all possible types of crises that might strike. In some 
organizations, contingency plans are not reviewed and updated on a regular basis. 
Contingency plans can be very useful to guide decisions in times of crisis, but the 
external environment can be quite unpredictable and can make those plans irrelevant. 
299

Operations management 
Below you will find four infamous business disasters that have occurred in recent 
times. Choose one to research and explore how the crisis was managed by the 
organization. Consider costs, safety, time, and risks related to the way in which 
these disasters were managed. 
Present your findings back to the class and ensure that you support your judgments 
with specific evidence. 
BP Deepwater Horizon disaster 
VW emissions scandal 
Facebook—Cambridge Analytica data privacy 
scandal 
Case study - Chipotle 
US prosecutors fined Chipotle Mexican Grill $25m after hundreds of customers 
who ate at the burrito chain fell sick, some with norovirus. The country’s biggest 
ever penalty for food safety violations was issued after more than 1,100 people 
across the country became ill over a three-year period between 2015 and 2018. The 
company’s failure to follow food safety protocols led to the food poisoning, the 
Department of Justice said on Tuesday as it filed the criminal complaint. Chipotle 
has reached a deferred prosecution agreement with the DoJ, under which it will 
pay the fine and avoid conviction if it complies with a food safety programme. The 
company was implicated in at least five outbreaks of food-borne illness connected 
to its restaurants in the Los Angeles area, Boston, Virginia and Ohio, the complaint 
said. They included norovirus, a highly infectious pathogen that can be transmitted 
by food workers and can cause severe illness. Symptoms include diarrhoea, 
vomiting and stomach pain. Chipotle failed to ensure that employees complied 
with food safety protocols and violated the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 
300

prosecutors said. The incidents were caused in part by employees who were sick or 
had recently been sick showing up for work and preparing food. Some employees 
reported inadequate staffing and food safety training and complained that they 
were under pressure to work while sick. 
‘This case highlights why it is important for restaurants and members of the food 
services industry to ensure that managers and employees consistently follow food 
safety policies,’ said Jody Hunt, assistant attorney-general at the DoJ's civil division. 
Brian Niccol, Chipotle chief executive, said in a statement: ‘This settlement 
represents an acknowledgment of how seriously Chipotle takes food safety every 
day and is an opportunity to definitively turn the page on past events.’ 
Chipotle added that it had already improved its policies and procedures and that its 
food safety culture was now ‘one of the finest in the industry’. 
The company also opted to take a transparent marketing approach and filmed new 
commercials in the style of a documentary, to show customers the types of fresh 
ingredients and careful preparation that went into making famous dishes. 
Were Chipotle able to regain customer trust? If so, how? Research other examples 
of companies taking action to regain trust. 
o INVG 
301

