302 
Operations management 
5.8 Research and development 
Learningoutoomes 
| 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* discuss the importance of research and development for a business 
* explain the importance of developing goods and services to address customers’ 
unmet needs 
* 
explain the importance of intellectual property protection in the form of 
copyrights, patents, and trademarks 
* 
explain the importance of incremental and disruptive innovation for businesses. 
Research and development 
An organization gathers knowledge to create new products or discover new ways 
to improve existing products and services: this process is known as research and 
development (R&D). Larger companies may have their own in-house R&D team, which 
will test and refine products and processes before commercial use. It’s also not unusual 
for companies to outsource this work to universities, due to a lack of in-house capacity, 
or to access the expertise and advanced research equipment universities possess. 
Regardless of the approach a business takes, R&D involves some risks. There may be 
uncertainties around whether what is being attempted is technologically feasible or 
if it will achieve the hoped-for objectives. 
The R&D process can take months or years to yield results that are of use to the 
organization. The process involved will vary from company to company; Figure 5.16 
shows one possible approach. 
1 
Foster ideas: This initial stage involves the brainstorming of ideas, whereby 
members of the research team gain an understanding of issues facing their 
industry. This will help to identify broad areas of opportunity or concern. 
] 
Focus ideas: The initial pool of ideas may be broad and generic. The research 
team will need to consider the ideas that have potential and do not have 
insurmountable limitations. By looking at existing products, the research team 
can assess how original a new idea is and the scope for development. 
b 
Develop ideas: Once an idea has been thoroughly researched, a market survey 
may be carried out to assess market readiness. Ideas with real potential now start 
to gain traction and the process of turning research into a marketable product 
begins. 
N 
Prototypes and trials: The research team will work closely with product 
developers to work on how an idea can be turned into a practical product. The 
prototype may increase in complexity as the process develops. Production 
processes and sales tactics now start to enter the thought process. 
wn 
Regulatory, marketing, and product development activities: As the product 
begins to take shape, the R&D process divides into the relevant areas needed to 
bring the product to market. Regulatory aspects are assessed, and work begins 
to meet all the criteria for approvals and launch. The marketing function begins

Start here 
> 
Foster ideas 
Focus ideas 
Develop ideas 
Regulatory, 
marketing & 
product 
development 
activities 
Prototypes 
and trials 
developing strategies and preparing their materials while sales, pricing, and 
distribution are also planned for. 
6 
Launch: The product has now developed from idea to reality and is ready for an 
introduction to the market. 
Evaluation of the product is ongoing and may lead to possible re-designs if needed. At 
any point in this process the idea may be scrapped. Its feasibility may be questioned, or 
the research may not reveal what the business hoped for. Critical analysis is required 
at every stage to ensure the business is making rational decisions on the viability of the 
product under development. 
The importance of R&D 
R&D is an important consideration for a business. It provides the insights needed to 
develop new products and services that will have the competitive edge in the markets 
in which it operates. R&D can also lead to increased efficiency and reduced costs in 
existing processes and practices. 
While pharmaceutical companies are often associated with large R&D spending, 
many industries are committing large parts of their revenue to R&D investments. A 
McKinsey & Company report provides an overview of how spending on R&D varies 
across industries, and is captured in Figure 5.17. 
Companies that invest in R&D are more likely to be successful than those that don’t. 
Advantages of R&D 
* 
Quality improvements: Focusing on improvements in products and services 
through R&D can lead to high levels of quality, which helps to ensure customer 
satisfaction and build retention. 
« Figure5.16 A basic R&D 
approach that an organization 
could follow 
303

Operations management 
Figure 5.17 Global private o 
Total global private-sector R&D investment 
sector R&D spending by 
200 1 
industry, 2018 (§, billion) 
50 
+ 
Spending ($ billion) 
3 
High tech, | Industrials | Automotive | Construction 
Electric 
Materials 
media and 
and 
and 
power, oil 
telecom 
assembly 
 |infrastructure| 
gas and 
utilities 
Pharma 
Consumer 
 Chemicals 
 Healthcare 
 Aerospace 
Other 
and medical 
and 
systems 
and 
products 
agriculture 
and 
defense 
services 
Industry 
» Competitive advantage: R&D spending helps businesses to stay ahead of 
the curve by constantly innovating and improving; this provides a significant 
advantage in the marketplace over their competitors. 
» 
First mover advantage: Through investing in R&D, a business may develop a 
completely new product; this could result in a first mover advantage, which refers 
to an advantage gained by a company that is first to introduce a product or service 
to the market. 
» Sustainable practices: R&D can help a business to identify ways to reduce its 
negative impact on the environment. This may foster adoption of sustainable 
practices and contribute to corporate social responsibility. 
* Increased efficiency: R&D can yield efficiency savings that can allow tasks to 
be completed more quickly and accurately. Time and money saved can then be 
reinvested into the business. 
* Increased productivity: Alongside efficiency benefits, R&D can lead to an 
increase in productivity as new processes and methods are discovered and 
implemented, resulting in increased profits. 
Disadvantages of R&D 
* 
Cost: R&D is an expensive process with no guarantee there will be a commercial 
opportunity as a result from it. 
* Small firm disadvantage: Larger firms can invest more heavily in R&D, which is 
likely to leave smaller firms at a significant disadvantage, limiting their ability to 
compete. 
* Varying budgets: R&D budgets are often the first ones to be cut when the business 
environment becomes challenging, such as in recessionary periods. 
» Opportunity cost: Businesses face a decision on how best to invest their time and 
money; choosing to spend large amounts on R&D creates an opportunity cost, as 
that money could have been invested elsewhere in the business. 
Research and development spending also has wider benefits for the economy. Developing 
new products and services creates new employment opportunities. R&D can lead to 
entirely new industries, creating even more jobs and driving economic growth. 
304

Which companies spend the most on R&D? 
Make a note of which industries these companies operate in. What notable 
successes have resulted from that R&D spending? To what extent have these 
successes been able to recoup the R&D investment for the business? 
Innovation 
Innovation can take the form of 
a product, service, business model, or strategy that is 
both novel and useful. Innovations may simply be new features added to an existing 
feature — it doesn’t have to be a major breakthrough in technology. 
Identifying unmet needs 
By identifying unmet needs, companies know exactly where to focus and what to 
do to create a unique position in the market. This dramatically increases success in 
branding, innovation, and growth. Therefore, to create new value, refresh their brands, 
differentiate, and grow, companies must figure out the unmet needs of customers. 
Businesses can look to identify customer’s unmet needs in several ways: 
» 
Identify industry trends: A business can identify key trends that may disrupt 
their industry based on customer needs. 
« Perform a competitive analysis: This provides a business with current 
intelligence on vital new features and functionality that customers are looking for 
and that competitors think will be the next big thing. 
* Mine business data: Chat logs, purchase history, reviews, forums, and social 
media are a fantastic source of consumer opinions, needs, desires, and complaints, 
just waiting to be converted from an unmet need to a new product or feature. 
* 
Conduct interviews: Today’s best innovations have been discovered by simply 
taking the time to pay attention to a customer’s unmet need. 
» 
Conduct ethnographic research: The objective of this type of research is to gain 
insights into how users interact with things in their natural environment. 
» 
Conduct quantitative research: This can include usage data and attitude research. 
« 
Conduct voice of customer (VOC) research: Real-time feedback through ‘voice 
of the customer” interactions to track what customers are saying and latch onto 
new trends quickly. 
Incremental innovation 
Incremental innovation can be defined as a series of small improvements made to a 
company’s existing products or services. These tend to be lower cost improvements 
over time that help to further differentiate a company from the competition while 
building on its current product offering. 
The Gillette razor is a classic example of incremental innovation; it has been through 
small changes over the years since it was first introduced in 1900. 
Likewise, from more of a technological perspective, the iPhone is an example of 
incremental innovation as the design has changed little since its introduction in 2007. 
However, small improvements have been seen from model to model, whether this be 
storage capacity or camera quality. 
305

Figure5.18 The Gillette pp 
razor throughout the years 
IB learner profile 
Principled 
Innovation in business has the 
goal of getting existing and 
new customers to purchase 
products. Often the product 
a new product replaces is 
perfectly usable and still being 
used by consumers. After 
purchasing the latest product, 
consumers often discard the 
old one without a second 
thought. Many businesses 
are now taking a principled 
approach by engaging in buy- 
back and trade-in schemes. 
Identify and explore how 
businesses are adopting this 
approach and moving towards 
a circular economy. 
Figure5.19 Revenue of pp 
streaming service against DVD 
rental store 
306 
Operations management 
1900 
1920 
1950 
1998 
2010 
2014 
2014 
Disruptive innovation 
Disruptive innovation can be defined as a process in which new entrants challenge 
incumbent firms, often despite inferior resources. This can come about in a couple of 
ways. Overlooked segments may be targeted by entrants, with a product considered 
inferior by the incumbent’s most-demanding customers. In time, the product may 
move up-market as it improves. Alternatively, companies may create a market where 
no market exists and turn non-consumers into consumers. 
Netflix is an example of disruptive innovation. The business started out by mailing out 
DVDs to customers who wanted a Blockbuster style experience at home, where they 
could browse through titles and request them without having to travel to the video 
store to hire them. However, after it experienced a level of success in the marketplace, 
it decided to restrategize its business model. Netflix then moved from mailing DVDs 
to streaming films instead. 
The decision to grant customers access to streaming movies online meant that 
Netflix could officially displace Blockbuster from the market, and it went out of 
business. For many people across the world, Netflix is now their official movie 
streaming platform. 
B Online streaming 
$10 billion 
service company 
I 
revenue 
E DVD rental 
- =~ 
/ 
store revenue 
$5 billion 
~ 
2004 
2010 
2015 
2018 
> Digital Leadership

Case study - Uber 
After a year of multibillion-dollar fundraisings, bans in cities around the world 
and massive expansion, Uber, the ride-hailing app provider, has become Silicon 
Valley’s poster child for disruption. The five-year-old company has revolutionized 
the taxi market in more than 230 cities in 51 countries without owning a single car. 
Its marketplace connects drivers of regular cars and taxis with passengers through 
its smartphone app, backed by a ‘big data’ team that tries to ensure a ride is never 
more than five minutes away. Led by co-founder Travis Kalanick, Uber has crushed 
competition from other ride-sharing start-ups and taxi unions alike, delivering a 
valuation of $40bn as it raised $1.2bn in new funding in December. This war chest 
allows it to slash fares as part of its attritional battle to win market share from rival 
apps and incumbent cab services. Its success has seen San Francisco taxi rides fall 
by two-thirds in less than two years and caused Hailo, a London-based taxi app, 
to exit North America complaining it was impossible to compete with Uber’s 
pricing tactics. 
Some of Uber’s drivers have also complained they are forced to work longer 
hours to make the same amount of money. A backlash has begun. Regulators, 
particularly in Europe, have launched probes into the company’s operations, while 
sometimes Uber disrupts itself. In November, one of its senior executives said Uber 
should hire investigators to dig up information about the ‘personal lives’ of critical 
journalists. The comments created a firestorm of criticism. The incident led many 
to ask whether the company’s corporate culture, embodied by the man at the 
helm, would prove to be its Achilles heel. Mr Kalanick has spoken of Uber fighting 
political campaigns to expand into cities against taxi drivers’ resistance. To this end, 
he hired David Plouffe, a former adviser to President Barack Obama, as his head 
of policy in August. ‘I don’t subscribe to the idea that the company has an image 
problem,” Mr Plouffe told Vanity Fair. ‘[ actually think when you are a disrupter you 
are going to have a lot of people throwing arrows.’ And as it races towards a $10bn 
P - 
Befare MNetflix, HBO 
MaxGo, and Amazon 
Prime, there was 
Blockbuster. 
During the 1990s and 
early 2000s, Blockbuster 
was the premier video 
rental company in the U.S. 
However, more dynamic 
services emerged, and 
customers complained 
about the late fees levied 
by Blockbuster. Eventually, 
it went bankrupt. 
David Cook opened the 
first Blockbuster store in 
1985 At its peak in 2004, 
there were 9,000 stores 
across the world earning 
$5.9 billion in revenue. 
Blockbuster turned 
down the opportunity to 
buy Netflix in 2000 for 
S50 million. 
By 2013, after failing 
to keep up with its 
competitors and after 
various buyouts, the 
company filed for 
bankruptcy. 
Today, one store remains 
in Bend, Oregon, which 
has now also turned into 
an Airbnb. The standalone 
Blockbuster has become a 
novel tourist attraction but 
does have a loyal customer 
base of 4,000 accounts. 
In 2020, it partnered with 
Airbnb to allow fans to stay 
up to three nights with four 
of their friends for just $4 
a night. 
307

Figure 5.20 The inventicn 
and creation process 
308 
| 
Operations management 
revenue target next year, Uber is not satisfied with taking on taxis alone. From 
burgers in Beirut and cycle couriers in New York to kittens in Seattle, it is already 
experimenting with moving more than just people. 
Research another example of a company that could be considered a disruptive 
innovator. 
Property protection 
Intellectual property rights 
Intellectual property rights (IPR) are the rights given to people for their ideas and 
creations. They usually give the creator an exclusive right over the use of their creation 
for a certain period. IPR promote innovation and creativity, which in turn generates 
jobs and improves competitiveness. IPR enable authors, artists, designers, inventors, 
and other IPR owners to benefit when others use their creations and inventions. 
Figure 5.20 provides an illustration of where the consideration of intellectual property 
comes into the invention and creation process. 
There are several measures in place to protect innovative ideas and assets. 
Patents 
Patents grant an exclusive right for a new technical invention. Once obtained, a patent 
holder can grant a license to somebody wishing to produce a copy of the invention in 
return for a royalty payment (a fee paid to the patent holder). 
Copyright 
This ensures that authors, composers, artists, film makers, and other creators receive 
recognition, payment, and protection for their work, such as paintings, books, films, 
and music. 
- 
Ensuring respect for rights 
1 
New products and services 
Exporting 
Bringing to the market 
(trademark, branding...) 
1 
Financing 
1 
™\ 
IP title 
(patent, design, model, copyright...) 
t 
Idea 
Research and development 
1 
s 

Interesting information 
Copyright protects the creative work of the owners but only for a certain amount 
of time. Copyright protection starts as soon as a work is created. However, once the 
copyright has expired, anyone can use or copy the work. 
The length of copyright depends on the type of work produced. This table shows 
how long copyright lasts in the UK. 
Type of work 
How long copyright usually lasts 
Written, dramatic, musical, and artistic | 70 years after the author’s death 
work 
Sound and music recording 
70 years from first publication 
Films 
70 years after the death of the director, 
screenplay author, and composer 
Broadcasts 
50 years from first broadcast 
Layout of published editions of written, | 25 years from first publication 
dramatic, or musical works 
Trademarks 
A word, logo, or symbol can be protected through a trademark, which then prevents 
its use by competitors. 
Registered design protection 
The outward appearance of 
a product can be registered as a design for protection, for 
example, the shape of 
an armchair, smartphone, or car. This only relates to the shape 
or appearance of the product. It gives the owner the exclusive right to the design of the 
product to deter others from copying it. 
Geographical indications 
The name of a location that is associated with a product can be protected, which acts 
as an assurance that the product has been produced in a particular place, often to a 
specific recipe or traditional practice. Examples include Prosciutto di Parma, Scotch 
whisky, and Champagne. 
Trade secrets 
This is a valuable piece of knowledge that is closely guarded either by the business or 
within the industry, which provides a competitive advantage over rivals. 
There are many examples of companies with trade secrets. KFC's original recipe 
is considered to be top-secret. The company takes extra measures to ensure the 
secrecy of the herbs and spices used, including guarding the recipe within a high- 
security safe surrounded by various other security measures. There is a strict limit 
309

310 
Operations management 
on employee access to the knowledge of the secret ingredients. To increase the 
security of the original recipe, production of the secret mix of herbs and spices is 
split across two different manufacturers. 
What other famous examples of closely guarded trade secrets can you find? Work 
with a partner to research an example and report back to your class. 
Practice questions 
1 
List in order the six steps of the research and development 
process. 
(6 marks) 
2 Distinguish between incremental and disruptive innovation. 
(4 marks) 
3 Explain two ways in which a business can protect its intellectual 
property. 
(4 marks) 
4 In 2020, Dyson announced its plans to double its portfolio of products and enter 
entirely new fields by 2025 taking it beyond the home. To enable these plans, 
Dyson committed to a £2.75 billion investment plan into new technologies and 
new products over the five year period. The investments focused in Singapore, 
the UK, and the Philippines, and were backed by plans to hire additional 
engineers and scientists in fields such as software, machine learning, and 
robotics. 
Dyson stated it would invest further into research in the fields of robotics, 
next generation motor technology, intelligent products, machine learning, 
connectivity, and material science. A key focus is the commercialization of 
Dyson’s proprietary solid state battery technology, which it developed in the US, 
UK, Japan, and Singapore. It promised safer, cleaner, longer-lasting, and more 
efficient energy storage than existing batteries. 
The announcement came one year after James Dyson scrapped his electric 
car project, revealing that it left him £500 million out of pocket. But, it turns 
out, it wasn't in vain. Apart from the introduction of new staff with different 
skills, many of whom still work for Dyson, the research and development the 
company made into battery technology, he says, was invaluable. 
Evaluate the decision by Dyson to invest £2.75 billion into new 
technologies and new products over a five year period. 
(10 marks)

