5.9 Management information systems 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
* 
define the term ‘management information system’ 
+ 
outline what is meant by data analytics, databases, cybersecurity, and 
cybercrime 
* 
suggest ways in which VR, Al, internet of things, and big data can be used by 
businesses 
+ compare and contrast a range of customer loyalty programs 
+ 
evaluate the use of data to manage and monitor employees 
+ examine the use of advanced computer technologies and technological 
innovation on business decision-making and stakeholders. 
What is a management information system? 
Management information systems (MIS) are tools used to support business processes, 
operations, intelligence, and technology. MIS are designed to move data and manage 
information; in turn, data-driven reports are produced that help businesses make the 
right decisions at the right time. 
MIS categories 
There are now many specialized MIS available to businesses. 
* 
Executive information system (EIS): Senior management use an EIS to make 
decisions that affect the entire organization. Executives need high-level data with 
the ability to go into the details as necessary. 
* Marketing information system (MKIS): A marketing team uses a MKIS to report 
on the effectiveness of past and current campaigns, and to use the lessons learned 
to plan future campaigns. 
* 
Business intelligence system (BIS): Operations use a BIS to make business 
decisions based on the collection, integration, and analysis of the collected data 
and information. This system is like an EIS, but both lower-level managers and 
executives use it. 
* 
Customer relationship management system (CRM): A CRM system stores key 
information about customers, including previous sales, contact information, and 
sales opportunities. Marketing, customer service, sales, and business development 
teams often use a CRM. 
311

Operations management 
A CRM can record a variety 
28 
Customer 
Monitoring 
of information about each 
customer and their 
transactions 
Promation 
Support 
SAAS 
PP 
Interaction 
Payment 
* 
Sales force automation system (SFA): This is a specialized component of a 
CRM system that automates many tasks that a sales team performs. It can include 
contact management, lead tracking and generation, and order management. 
 Transaction processing system (TPS): A TPS completes a sale and manages 
related details. On a basic level, a TPS could be a point of sale (POS) system, or a 
system that allows a traveler to search for a hotel and include room options, such 
as price range, the type and number of beds, or a swimming pool, and then select 
and book it. Employees can use the data created to report on usage trends and track 
sales over time. 
» Knowledge management system (KMS): Customer service departments can use 
a KMS to answer questions and troubleshoot problems. 
* 
Financial accounting system (FAS): This MIS is specific to departments dealing 
with finances and accounting, such as accounts payable and accounts receivable. 
* Human resource management system (HRMS): This system tracks employee 
performance records and payroll data. 
* Supply chain management system (SCM): Manufacturing companies use SCMs 
to track the flow of resources, materials, and services from purchase until final 
products are shipped. 
Data analytics 
Many businesses collect vast amounts of data every day but, in their raw form, these 
data don’t mean anything. This is where the role of data analytics comes in. Data 
analytics is the process of analyzing raw data to draw out meaningful, actionable 
insights, which are then used to inform and drive smart business decisions. 
A data analyst will extract raw data, organize it, and then analyze it, transforming 
it from incomprehensible numbers into coherent, intelligible information. Having 
interpreted the data, the data analyst will then pass on their findings in the form of 
suggestions or recommendations about what the company’s next steps should be. 
312

Businesses need to be aware of the ethical concerns surrounding data collection and 
how that information can be used. For example, insurance companies collecting data 
about customers may result in higher insurance premiums. 
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is the toughest privacy and 
security law in the world. Although it was drafted and passed by the European 
Union (EU), it imposes obligations onto organizations anywhere if they target or 
collect data related to people in the EU. The regulation came into effect on 25 May 
2018. The GDPR levies harsh fines against those who violate its 
privacy and security standards, with penalties reaching into the 
- 
tens of millions of euros. 
E 
q 
' 
Visit the GDPR website. 
How has the introduction of GDPR impacted the way 
businesses gather and use the data they hold about customers? 
Databases 
A database refers to a collection of logically related information organized so that it can be 
easily accessible, managed, and updated. Databases are generally accessed electronically 
from a computer system and are usually controlled by a database management system. 
The database administrator is the individual responsible for managing a business’ 
databases, including database security, access control, backup, and disaster recovery. 
Cybersecurity and cybercrime 
For each kind of crime in the analog world, there is an equivalent in the digital world. 
For instance, theft of property or identity can occur digitally. Hostage taking, ransom 
holding, attacks on critical infrastructure — these crimes in the physical world have a 
cybercrime equivalent in the virtual world. 
There are several ways that cybercrime can hinder businesses. 
Increased costs 
To protect themselves, firms may incur any number of costs, including: 
« 
cybersecurity technology and expertise 
 notifying affected parties of 
a breach 
* 
insurance premiums 
* 
public relations support 
* 
hiring legal experts to remain compliant with cybersecurity regulations. 
Hiscox, a well-known insurance company, reported that 6 per cent of companies paid 
a ransom in 2019 because of ransomware attacks, totaling $381 million in losses. 
In addition, if customers decide to sue a business as a result of their data being 
compromised following a cyberattack, the business may have to pay damages as an 
outcome of such civil action. 
How might the methods 
used in R&D be limited by 
ethical considerations? 
313

Because of the digitization 
of society, there is an 
increasing reliance on 
technology. Everything 
from public transportation 
to utilities uses automation 
and networked systems 
to keep it functioning; 
even roads and bridges 
have sensors. In an 
interconnected and 
digitally enabled world, 
everything needs to be 
secured. 
The 2022 (ISC)? 
Cybersecurity Workforce 
Study found that 3.4 
million more cybersecurity 
professionals are needed 
globally. The number of 
new ransomware variants 
identified in the first half 
of 2022 increased by 
nearly 100% compared to 
the previous six-month 
period. According to one 
estimate, the global cost 
of cybercrime will grow 
from $8.44 trillion in 2022 
to $23.84 trillion in 2027. 
The Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation 
and Development 
{OECD) estimates that 
technological advances 
will transform one billion 
jobs in the coming 
decade. Cybersecurity 
workers are sought 
after, and the field is 
continually evolving, 
S0 organizations must 
provide continuing 
education and career 
growth opportunities. 
As society become 
more dependent an 
technology, cybersecurity 
becomes critical to 
ensuring a sustainable 
future, which could help 
to change the world for 
the better. 
314 
Operations management 
Operational disruption 
Cybercriminals can use multiple ways to disrupt a company’s normal activities, 
from infecting computer systems with malware that erases high value information, 
to installing malicious code on a server that blocks staff 
or customer access to the 
business’ website. 
Disrupting business as usual is the favored tool of so-called ‘hacktivists’, who also 
breach the computer systems of government agencies or multinational corporations to 
call out a perceived wrong or increase transparency. 
Altered business practices 
Companies must think about how they collect and store information to ensure 
that sensitive information isn’t vulnerable. Many companies have stopped storing 
customers’ financial and personal information such as credit card numbers. 
Customers are increasingly concerned with knowing how the businesses they deal 
with handle security issues. Having clear security protocols in place can increase the 
likelihood of customers frequenting a company’s website and going on to make a 
purchase. 
Reputational damage 
Companies that fall victim to larger cyberattacks risk their brand equity and reputation 
becoming tarnished. Trust in the business from both customers and suppliers can be 
difficult to regain when technological infrastructure has been compromised. 
In 2014, criminals compromised the data of JPMorgan Chase’s banking customers. 
Hackers gained access to the names, addresses, phone numbers, and email addresses of 
76 million household accounts and 7 million small business accounts. 
In addition to reduced trust, it has been found that the share prices of compromised 
companies fell an average of 3.5 per cent following an attack. 
Lost revenue 
As aresult of a cyberattack, businesses may experience a sudden drop in revenue, as 
customers move elsewhere to protect themselves against cybercrime. Companies can 
also lose money to hackers who extort their victims. 
Stolen intellectual property 
A company’s product designs, technologies, and go-to-market strategies are often 
amonyg its most valuable assets. Much of this intellectual property is stored in the 
cloud (which is explained in more detail later in this section), where it’s vulnerable to 
cyberattacks. 
There have been increasing numbers of high-profile cyberattacks on businesses 
as organized crime groups become ever more sophisticated with their hacking 
techniques.

Research cyberattacks on businesses that have made the news in the past year. 
Think about: 
* To what degree was the business and its customer base affected? 
* How did this impact the reputation of the business? 
* How much did the cyberattack cost the business? 
* What steps has the business taken to prevent future cyberattacks? 
Critical infrastructures 
For 
a business to run an MIS, it needs to ensure that it has critical infrastructures in 
place. 
Artificial neural network 
An artificial neural network (ANN) is an attempt to replicate the brain’s network of 
neurons so that the computer may learn and make judgments in a human-like manner. 
They are computational models, or algorithms. 
Neural networks are the new, smarter way of identifying hidden patterns within data 
sets and making predictions based on them. Neural networks have a vast array of 
business applications and have been helping businesses in automating tasks that were 
previously done manually. 
Marketing and eCommerce 
The recent rise of ‘big data’ makes ANNs highly useful for marketing. Marketers can 
use these tools to find and reach customers more effectively, which benefits them in 
the following ways: 
» consumer behavior predictions 
* 
creating and understanding the more complex buyer segments 
* 
automating marketing 
* 
creating content. 
These tools, given enough data, can deliver more precise insights and predictions, 
allowing marketers to make better strategic decisions. 
An example of this is the personalization of product recommendations in online 
stores, such as Amazon. The system analyzes the user’s past behavior, purchases, 
what similar products they've viewed for more directed recommendations, and other 
actions, to provide a more comprehensive marketing strategy. 
Retail and sales 
By using ANNG, retail and sales-driven companies can engage in: 
» Demand forecasting: This identifies when consumers will require a product or 
service, and how to provide continuous product availability and on-time deliveries. 
« 
Sales forecasting: This identifies when and what a customer is most likely to buy. 
As aresult, businesses can identify and understand the factors that contribute to 
higher sales in retail stores, as well as estimate future sales numbers. 
315

316 
Operations management 
Finance and banking 
Neural networks can also be applied to automate processes in banking and finance. 
Among other things, ANNs can be used to: 
» 
predict future exchange rate fluctuations 
 predict business failures 
* 
assess debt risk 
» approve credit 
* approve mortgages 
* 
detect fraud. 
Citibank has set up a neural network that aims to detect fraudulent transactions on 
credit cards. 
Security 
ANNSs can be used to: 
» 
detect fraud 
* 
detect and prevent malware and viruses 
* 
prioritize alerts to send to the relevant people 
* 
detect spam 
* moderate content 
+ 
detect distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. 
A system set up to detect DDoS attacks can watch out for patterns such as many requests 
coming from a single IP address, or many requests at once from random IP addresses. 
Insurance 
[nsurance companies make use of neural networks to forecast future loss ratios and 
adjust premiums, helping to increase their profit margin. 
Some uses of neural networks in insurance include: 
* 
the forecasting of future loss ratios and premiums 
* 
adjusting future premiums 
* detecting fraudulent claims. 
The insurance company Allstate uses neural networks to pick out ‘accident-prone’ 
drivers and give them an appropriate rate. 
Logistics 
Neural networks are used in logistics to help with everything from packaging to shipping. 
Neural networks can: 
* 
help package products 
* be used in routing to help determine the best route for a truck driver 
» 
identify defects in the production line 
* be used in dispatching to help with the packaging of items for transportation 
* balance out an assembly line by assigning jobs to workers based on their skill sets.

Data centers 
A data center is a facility composed of networked computers, storage systems, 
and computing infrastructure that organizations use to assemble, process, store, 
and disseminate large amounts of data. A business typically relies heavily on the 
applications, services, and data contained within a data center, making it a critical asset 
for everyday operations. 
Case study - Volkswagen 
Volkswagen (VW) Group has announced the aim 
of making its data center operations net carbon- 
neutral by 2027. 
To achieve this goal, the group has expanded 
its computing capacities at Green Mountain, a 
Norwegian operator of CO>-neutral data centers. 
With this expansion, one quarter of VW's global data center operations will run 
carbon-neutrally, the company says. This corresponds to annual CO, savings of 
10,000 tons. 
If VW achieves the goal for its data centers to be net carbon-neutral by 2027, this 
would be three years earlier than foreseen in the European Green Deal, under which 
European data center operators agreed to make their data centers climate-neutral 
by 2030. 
All servers at Green Mountain run on 100 per cent renewable electricity generated 
by hydropower and are cooled naturally by the adjacent fjord. 
‘Given the rising demand for computing power and data storage to enable 
Volkswagen Group’s NEW AUTO strategy, a sustainable IT roadmap with 
ambitious goals is paramount to systematically reduce our carbon footprint. With 
data centers being the biggest contributor of carbon emissions in IT, expanding our 
computing capacity at Green Mountain is a strong lever to make our data center 
operations carbon-neutral by 2027 
‘We appreciate the renewed trust Volkswagen has placed in us and are pleased to 
support them on their journey toward full carbon-neutrality, said Tor Kristian 
Gyland, CEO of Green Mountain. ‘Together we share the same vision of a more 
sustainable future.’ 
For the new site at SVG1-Rennesay, Green Mountain converted a former high- 
security NATO ammunition storage facility into a unique 22,600 m? high-security 
mountain hall colocation data center. The infrastructure has been designed to 
be expanded up to 2 x 26MW, with Volkswagen using 3MW of capacity. For the 
cooling, which in traditional data centers accounts for 40 to 80 per cent of the 
electricity required to power the servers, SVG1-Rennesoy takes advantage of the 
adjacent deep-water fjord. The fjord is 100 meters deep, at which depth there is a 
constant water temperature of 8 degrees Celsius all year round. 
Conceptual understanding: 
Sustainability 
As the world becomes 
increasingly digital, data centers 
and data transmission networks 
are using more and more energy. 
According to the International 
Energy Agency (IEA), data centers 
used between 1 per cent and 
1.5 per cent of global electricity 
consumption in 2021. 
317

Companies that provide 
cloud computing services 
own and maintain server 
rooms all over the world 
318 
Operations management 
In Norway, 98.9 per cent of electricity production is renewable, with the majority 
generated from hydropower. Hydropower has both a minimal carbon footprint 
and a marginal ecological impact. The Norwegian government vigorously 
promotes the utilization of power from renewable energy sources for new 
branches of industry, for example, in climate-neutral data centers. Tax breaks, low 
energy prices, and stable political conditions make Norway an ideal location for 
green IT. 
Volkswagen says it was the first automaker to commit to the Paris climate 
agreement back in 2018. By 2050, the company aims to be net CO, neutral. 
In its core business, the VW Group intends to achieve a 30 per cent CO, 
reduction by 2030. Today, more than 90 per cent of Volkswagen’s external 
power supply for its European manufacturing sites already comes from renewable 
energies. 
Define the term ‘data center’. 
2 Explain two advantages to VW of locating its data centers at Green Mountain 
in Norway. 
3 Discuss possible reasons why a vehicle company, such as VW, needs huge 
amounts of computing power and data storage for its business operations. 
Cloud computing 
Cloud computing is the delivery of IT resources over the Internet. It is often pay-as- 
you-go, meaning that business don’t have to buy, own and maintain physical data 
centers and servers. Instead, they can access a range of computing services, like 
storage, and databases from cloud providers such as Amazon Web Services (AWS). 
Organizations from a variety of industries and of different sizes are finding that the 
cloud has a wide range of uses. A few of these include virtual desktops, software 
development, disaster recovery, data backup and testing, big data analytics, and 
customer-facing web applications. 
Video game makers have grown exponentially through cloud computing; they use the 
cloud to deliver online games to millions of players around the world. 
Advantages of cloud computing include the following: 
Agility 
Easy access to a broad range of technologies means businesses can innovate faster and 
build things that may previously have been unachievable. 
Lower costs 
The cloud allows businesses to trade fixed costs (such as data centers and physical 
servers) for variable costs, and only pay for IT services as they consume them. The 
variable costs are much lower due to economies of scale compared to what a business 
would have to pay on their own.

Near-instant global release 
Businesses can expand to new geographic regions and deploy globally in minutes. 
AWS has infrastructure all over the world; so businesses can deploy applications, as an 
example, in many physical locations with just a few clicks. 
Virtual reality 
Virtual reality (VR) is a computer-generated virtual world that utilizes three- 
dimensional (3D) imagery and interactivity to create a realistic, immersive 
environment for the user. 
The experience typically involves a headset and other interactive devices such as 
gloves or handheld controllers to allow users to interact with the virtual environment. 
o 
. 
\ 
Increasingly affordable headsets are bringing VR closer to mainstream usage. 
' 
: 
Combined with the ability to meet with users instantly from anywhere across the 
globe, this trend could eventually see typical business processes shifting to a VR 
environment, making it a powerful tool in business. 
Open-minded 
Being open-minded is a 
. 
) 
willingness to try new things, or 
Uses of VR in business 
to consider 
new ideas. In which 
VR offers great potential in business particularly within training. The ability to create 
sl 
dee 
might there be an opportunity 
true-to-life immersive scenarios is a key advantage. VR has strong applications 
for virtual reality to play 2 
particularly within healthcare. With the ability to reset scenarios and correct mistakes, 
bigger role? 
VR provides surgeons with the opportunity to practice complex procedures. 
VR can also be utilized within manufacturing industries such as food production with 
the ability to simulate and test each stage of the process or the capabilities of different 
machinery. VR enables businesses to understand how performance could be maximised 
through experimenting with various conditions and parameters, in a less expensive way 
than conducting tests in real life. This is also a much safer and quicker alternative. 
The opportunities in marketing and customer service are also significant. VR provides the 
opportunity to create an immersive experience for the launch and exhibition of products 
and services. Customers could attend launch events of new products or test drive a new 
car in a virtual scenario, all whilst remaining in their own home. Instead of interacting 
with chatbots, customers could contact sales assistants in virtual environments which 
could more closely match the experience of talking with a real person. 
Despite these advantages, it is likely that customers will still want to trial and evaluate 
physical products, particularly if they are large or expensive. Using VR may begin to 
form a key part of marketing plans, but in the near future it is unlikely to become a 
direct replacement for the real experience. 
The internet of things 
The internet of things (IoT) describes the network of physical objects — ‘things’— that 
are embedded with sensors, software, and other technologies for the purpose of 
connecting and exchanging data with other devices and systems over the internet. 
These devices range from ordinary household objects to sophisticated industrial tools. 
The number of IoT connected devices is predicted to grow to over 22 billion by 2025. 
The agricultural sector 
is embracing this technology to increase productivity and yield 
levels. Figure 5.21 shows the ways in which a connected farm uses loT. 
319

320 
Operations management 
Data and information from every 
source can be collected into one 
central user-friendly platform. 
Sensors implanted into the ground 
will provide details on nutrient 
levels, moisture and even weather 
conditions. 
Farm animals can be monitored 
Driverless vehicles are already starting 
with smart collars or implants. 
to emerge on the market. As well as 
Sensors can keep track of 
being used for transportation, 
movement, health, 
machines could be used to automate 
fertility and productivity. 
fertilising, harvesting and weed control. 
A 
Figure5.21 The connected farm 
The [oT is reinventing the automobile by enabling connected cars. With [oT, car owners 
can operate their cars remotely by, for example, preheating the car before the driver gets 
in it or by summoning it by phone. Given the IoT’s ability to enable device-to-device 
communication, cars will soon be able to book their own service appointments. 
The connected car allows car manufacturers or dealers to turn the car ownership 
model on its head. Historically, the manufacturer’s relationship with the car ended 
once it was sent to the dealer. With connected cars, automobile makers or dealers 
can have a continuous relationship with their customers. 
Conduct your own research into connected cars and produce a short report 
detailing how [oT is changing the ownership experience for car consumers. 
Artificial intelligence 
As of 2021, 86 per cent of CEOs have said that artificial intelligence (Al) in business is a 
mainstay in their offices. Adopting it will likely mean the difference between thriving 
and surviving. Three key domains exist where Al is utilized in business. 
* Automation: Manually repetitive tasks are almost obsolete. Employees can now 
help to build the business by being able to focus on tasks that add real value.

 Data analytics: Analytics allow organizations to mine data to gain insights into 
repetitive patterns for better business outcomes. 
» 
Natural language processing (NLP): NLP helps search engines to be more 
intuitive and makes chatbots, which are found on most sales sites, more insightful 
and customer centric. 
These various aspects have been adopted differently across different business contexts. 
Sales and customer service 
A report by Harvard Business Review says that companies using Al for sales can 
grow leads by more than 50 per cent, reduce call time by 60-70 per cent, and costs by 
40-60 per cent. 
» Demand forecasting: Al can look at when and where client demand for products 
is set to increase and determine ways to take advantage of those trends to boost 
sales. 
» Lead scoring: Al uses historical data to help businesses identify and prioritize 
leads and convert more of those hot leads into sales. 
« 
Sales rep chat/email bot: Chatbots are said to improve sales by up to 67 per 
cent. They can start the conversation by tailoring a message, making it simple for 
customers to interact right away or come back later. 
Finance 
» 
Personal finance: Al is helping institutions offer financial guidance via chatbots 
for improved wealth management solutions. 
« Consumer finance: Al helps banks reduce fraud as it can monitor transactions 
and target irregularities in them to determine if they are legitimate or fraudulent. 
 Corporate finance: Al can help lower loan risk by being able to assist 
underwriters to better predict possible defaulters and the negative financial 
implications. 
Supply chain management 
A 2021 McKinsey report stated that SCM solutions based on Al will assist 
organizations in their desire to tackle the challenges of market volatility and the 
environmental impact of supply chains. 
Digital marketing 
* 
Online advertising: Al can determine which digital platform would be best suited 
for marketing the business. 
« 
Personalized user experience: Al makes it possible to understand the likes 
and dislikes, behavior patterns, and activities of millions of people every day to 
improve the user experience and create improved and more profitable customer 
relationships. 
« Al-powered chatbots: Chatbots can answer multiple customer queries 
simultaneously and that answer can be personalized to encourage users to buy 
right there and then. 
 Predictive analysis: Al can predict a customer’s future actions by studying their 
past behavior and characteristics, allowing marketers to use the data to create 
campaigns that attract more customers and convert them into paying 
customers. 
321

IB learner profile 
Knowledgeable 
We have considered how 
artificial intelligence is aiding 
businesses across a range of 
sectors and functional areas. 
Now build up a picture of how 
the use of artificial intelligence 
is enriching the consumer 
experience. 
Create your own information 
sheet on this topic that 
develops your understanding 
across a broad range of 
consumer experiences. 
322 
Operations management 
Content generation: Through processing several terabytes (TB) of data and 
analyzing thousands of pieces of content, Al can create content that looks like a 
human wrote it. 
Email marketing campaigns: Al can help a business tailor its message using 
behavior and preferences as a reference point. 
Project management 
Automate repetitive tasks: Gartner, a tech consulting and research company 
based in the U.S., predicted that, in 2021, Al augmentation generated $2.9 trillion in 
business value and recovered 6.2 billion hours of worker productivity. 
Use historical data: Al can mine historical data and use it to perform calculations 
and predictions and make the results more accurate and effective. 
Perform risk modeling and analysis: If things change suddenly, Al can 
demonstrate the possible impact using data on how those similar changes 
impacted previous projects. 
Increase decision-making speed: Al is programmed to follow only specific, rule- 
based workflows. This means anything standing in the way of ‘on-time delivery’ of 
a project can be quickly addressed. 
Optimize resource scheduling and allocation: Figuring out who is available to 
work on a project based on their current capacity can be time-consuming. Al can 
now perform those tasks on its own. 
Product design and development 
24/7 development: Robots don't need to take breaks, which facilitates the rapid 
expansion of production capabilities to meet worldwide evolving customer 
demands. 
Cost reduction: Leveraging Al technologies can help organizations allocate their 
resources more efficiently, make better forecasts, and reduce inventory costs. 
Quick decision-making: Machines can collect and process structured and 
unstructured data in a fraction of the time it would take humans to perform the 
same task. The data gathered can help determine consumer activity, allowing 
companies to anticipate future needs and make quicker production decisions. 
Human resources 
Talent acquisition and development: Al algorithms can screen applicants, 
maintain databases, and arrange interviews without requiring human input. 
Orientation of new recruits: Al can customize procedures to keep track of 
important contact details and processes, and other tasks like verification of legal 
documents. 
Training recruits: Using relevant data from a job description, Al can assign 
appropriate training to the employee. 
Enhancing employee experience: Al can be implemented across the employee 
lifecycle, from recruitment to HR service delivery and career pathing, resulting in a 
personalized employee experience. 
Big data 
Big data refers to large, diverse data sets that, when analyzed computationally, can 
reveal patterns, trends, and associations, especially relating to human behavior

and interactions. These trends and patterns identified can then be leveraged by 
businesses to inform business decisions. The four dimensions of big data are 
presented in Figure 5.22. 
Volume: There is a lot of it. 
Velocity: It needs to be analyzed quickly. 
Variety: It comes in many different formats. 
Veracity: It can be difficult to understand. 
Customer loyalty programs 
According to Shopify, more than 90 per cent of companies have embraced some 
type of customer loyalty program. Loyalty programs have become an effective tactic 
for increasing revenue. The same study by Shopify identified that as many as 84 per 
cent of consumers are prepared to stick with a brand that offers a loyalty program, 
with 66 per cent saying their spending behavior changes with the ability to earn 
rewards. 
The cost to businesses of retaining customers who repeat their purchases is a lot less 
than trying to acquire new customers. This is one of the main drivers for brands to 
invest in loyalty and rewards programs. 
Most customer loyalty programs fall into one of four categories: points-based, tiered, 
paid, and value-based programs. 
Points-based loyalty programs 
This type of loyalty program is one of the most common. It allows customers to build 
up points with every purchase, which can then be redeemed for free gifts, cashback 
toward purchases, along with a variety of other perks. In addition, customers can 
earn points from engagement on social media, birthdays, leaving reviews, or through 
gamification. 
<« Figure5.22 The four 
dimensions of big data 
To what extent is big data 
changing what it means to 
‘know your customers? 
Gamification is the strategy 
by which companies add 
typical elements of game 
playing (i.e., point scoring, 
competition, etc.) to their 
systems and services in 
an attempt to engage and 
stimulate users. 
323

Operations management 
Some service companies, like 
hairdressers and coffee shops, 
use loyalty stamp cards 
LOYALITY REWARDS 
In 1793, a merchant in 
the USA started giving 
out copper tokens, which 
could be collected then 
exchanged for items 
in the store, the first 
loyalty program. In 1872, 
the Grand Union Tea 
Company started to give 
tickets to customers. For 
every four tickets collected, 
the customer could 
exchange them for one 
pound of tea. 
From the 1930s until 
the late 1580s, S&H 
Green Stamps were 
trading stamps in the 
USA. Customers could 
exchange the stamps 
for products from their 
rewards catalogue. In 
1972, United Airlines 
launched the first 
frequent-flyer program. 
At the moment, 
Starbucks® Rewards is a 
popular loyalty program. 
In 2022, there were a 
reported 28.7 million 
active Starbucks® Rewards 
members, which equates 
to a 16% year-over-year 
growth in its loyalty 
program since its launch. 
324 
0 OOO%O 
Get your 10th visit free! 
CALL US TODAY 
123-456-7890 
Room for your website info 
Additional rooms more for promotions 
*Gome exchuskins may appy. Oter anky valid b0 loval cusiomens. 
© SaLowsspa 
The UK supermarket chain, Tesco, has been operating its Tesco Clubcard scheme since 
1995. Customers collect points on food, fuel, fashion, and more, in store and online. 
Points can then be converted into vouchers to spend in store or with partner companies. 
Tiered loyalty programs 
Tiered customer loyalty programs allow customers access to different benefits 
depending on their rank. The business may rank membership based on the amount 
that a customer spends or the frequency of use. This provides customers with an 
incentive: the higher their tier, the more exclusive and better rewards they’ll receive. 
Emirates Airlines operates a Skywards rewards program. Customers build up their tier 
miles with every flight they take, moving through the levels from Blue to Silver, to Gold, 
and finally to Platinum. Rewards include priority check-in, airport lounge access, priority 
baggage delivery, and chauffeur service to and from the airport, among other things. 
Paid loyalty programs 
Paid loyalty programs give customers immediate and ongoing benefits for a 
participation fee. These fees may be one-off or paid on a recurring basis. 
Amazon Prime is an example of a paid loyalty program. A monthly fee provides 
customers with access to free delivery, Amazon music, and Amazon’s Prime Video 
streaming service. Amazon Prime customers are the first to get access to sales events, 
special offers, and extended discounts. 
Value-based loyalty programs 
The idea behind a value-based loyalty program is to connect with customers on a deeper 
level. It involves donating a percentage of purchase costs to charity or welfare programs. 
Advantages and disadvantages of loyalty programs 
It is important for a business to be aware that implementing a customer loyalty 
program comes with both advantages and disadvantages to consider. 
Advantages 
» With a carefully planned loyalty rewards program, a business will encourage 
return customers. 
* 
Loyalty programs reward the most valued customers with what they love while 
also having a platform to promote new items. 
* The business gains valuable insight into their customers’ behavior and has a direct 
platform to communicate with those customers.

Disadvantages 
* Good rewards cost the business money and time. 
* Managing data can be difficult or costly. 
* The business may negatively impact or anger the most valued customers if there is 
aneed to end the program. 
The use of data to manage and monitor employees 
Digital technology is now as common as a pen in the modern-day workplace and has, 
in many business environments, completely replaced it. However, despite the benefits 
that technology and digitization bring to the workplace, unions and academics are 
claiming that ‘digital Taylorism’ is taking root and threatening the fundamental 
benefits of the ongoing ‘digital transformation’. 
‘Digital Taylorism’ refers to the vast array of digital tools being used to oversee 
workers and the business operations they are working in. Its aim is to focus on process 
improvement, by monitoring and collecting as much data as possible, to better inform 
decisions relating to specific goals and productivity. 
Innovations in technology have made it increasingly easy for managers to quickly and 
cheaply collect, process, evaluate, and act on large amounts of data. With big data, 
Taylorism has spread across industries and business functions. 
The problems caused by digital Taylorism 
Employers in the logistics industry use extensive and intensive data-driven systems 
that control fleets and employees. Sensors are used to track location, timing, driving, 
and other aspects of performance. Complex algorithms, analytics software, and other 
management system components generate intelligence that is then used to instruct truck 
drivers. A study by Cornell University concluded these intense management systems 
reduce workers’ autonomy and can ultimately lead to sleep deprivation and speeding. 
Technology allows sophisticated performance management of employees. Businesses, 
both large and small, use digital tools to create continuous streams of data for employee 
appraisal. Constant monitoring and the addition of peer review to supervisor feedback 
can create overly competitive, and sometimes hostile, dynamics between employees. 
As discussed in section 2.4, in Taylor’s era (the late 19th and early 20th century), workers 
were aware when they were being observed by management with stopwatches and 
notebooks. In today’s business environment, surveillance is increasingly hidden. A 
cashier at a fast food franchise who makes sales using a virtual cash register app on 
their tablet may be unaware of the programs running in the background, logging 
keystrokes, recording audio or video, transmitting data, and continuously rating 
performance. Employees may know that their work smartphones monitor their calls, 
texts, and internet browsing, but they may not know that the device also communicates 
geolocation data, allowing tracking of their movement all day, every day. 
The use of data mining to inform decision-making 
Data mining has emerged in response to the need for organizations to find a way to 
take advantage of the large amount of data stored in databases, from which traditional 
analysis methods are unable to extract useful information. Data mining works 
325

Operations management 
through technology based on algorithms that convert large amounts of raw data into 
meaningful information and new knowledge that can be used to inform decision- 
making. It is used for a variety of purposes, such as to improve customer experience, 
increase profitability, and reduce risks. 
Advantages of data mining 
* Gathering of reliable information: It can be used in marketing research to 
determine what products customers might be interested in and then make those 
products available to them. 
* 
Identification of trends: Through the identification of correlations between 
products, consumers, suppliers, and other aspects of the business, the organization 
can highlight trends that might not have been identified before, or at least help it to 
make more accurate predictions. 
* Aids decision-making: As more data is collected, the accuracy of data mining 
becomes greater, which helps to improve decision-making. 
* Detection of risks and fraud: Data mining can help identify risks and fraud that 
may not be detectable through traditional means of data analysis. 
+ Speed of analyzing large data: Data mining can be used to analyze data that was 
previously too difficult to obtain due to the sheer volume or type of information. 
Disadvantages of data mining 
» Data mining tools are complex and require training to use: Data analyticsisa 
complicated process and often requires people with training to use the tools. The 
barrier to entry for data analytics can discourage small businesses from using this 
technology. 
» Data mining techniques are fallible: Data mining doesn’t always provide 
accurate information. There are many ways to analyze data and some are more 
accurate than others. There may be information missing from a database that is 
needed to create a complete analysis. 
* 
Rising privacy concerns: This is a major disadvantage to data mining. 
Traditionally, companies would only share personal data with other companies to 
provide a service. Now, many people are worried that their personal information is 
being sold to third parties without their knowledge. 
» Data mining requires large databases: Data mining requires large databases to 
be effective. For example, if an email list contains 100 people, the data from those 
emails will not be enough for data mining. If the list contains 100,000 people, then 
there will be more information available and data mining will be more successful. 
» 
Expensive: Data mining can be a very expensive process. For example, companies 
must hire additional employees and technology specialists to ensure that the data 
mining is done correctly. Many businesses must invest in advanced data mining 
software, which can also be expensive. 
The ethics of management information systems 
Several ethical issues arise from MIS and technological innovation. 
326

Misuse of personal information 
How do businesses use personal information? Everyone’s digital footprint continues 
to grow. As people browse websites, make online purchases, post on social media, or 
submit information and preferences via online forms, personal information is being 
given and collected. Businesses use this information to hyper-personalize marketing 
and product offerings. This raises the ethical dilemma of whether such data gathering 
is violating consumers’ right to privacy. Often, consumers are required to indicate that 
they have read the terms and conditions of the website before submitting any data. These 
terms and conditions should explain how the business plans to use the data provided. 
Misinformation and deep fakes 
In the 21st century, we can keep up with real-time events and news as it breaks. Celebrities 
and political figures share opinions on social media without checking the facts, and those 
opinions can be further spread whether accurate or not. Online information does not 
always go through the thorough quality control process used for published newspapers 
and books. A business could use and accept this information when making decisions. 
Lack of oversight and acceptance of responsibility 
Organizations may operate a blend of their own and third-party technologies. This 
may lead to some confusion over where the responsibility lies for governance, use of 
big data, cybersecurity, and personal consumer information. 
Use of Al 
The use of Al raises ethical questions when it comes to the potential for it to replace 
jobs, the use of facial recognition, contact tracing, and location tracking, along with 
the potential for bias to be built in by programmers. 
Autonomous technology 
Self-driving cars and drone deliveries bring concerns with allowing programmed 
technology to operate without oversight. There may be too much trust placed in the 
technology by consumers without fully understanding it. 
Practice questions 
1 Identify two types of management information system (MIS) a 
business may use. 
(2 marks) 
Describe what is meant by ‘data analytics’. 
(2 marks) 
3 Suggest two ways in which artificial intelligence might be utilized 
in business. 
(4 marks) 
4 Choose two businesses that operate a loyalty program. Compare 
and contrast the loyalty programs for both the customers and the 
businesses involved. 
(10 marks) 
Conceptual understanding: 
Ethics 
In 2021, at UNESCO's 
General Conference, the 193 
Member States adopted the 
Recommendation on the Ethics 
of Artificial Intelligence. This aims 
to protect and promote human 
rights and human dignity, and to 
be an ethical guide to building 
respect for the rule of law in the 
digital world. 
What are the moral 
implications of possessing 
large amounts of 
information about 
consumer behavior? 
327 

