=== PAGE 75 ===
Forces and momentum 

=== PAGE 76 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
30 
◄ 
The launch of the James Webb Space Telescope took place on 25 December 2021. When an object 
• 
ejects a gas in a downward direction, the gas exerts an equal and upward force on the object. This is an 
example of a Newton's third law pair . 
• 
Guiding Questions 
How can we use our knowledge and understanding of the forces acting on a 
system to predict changes in translational motion? 
How can Newton's laws be modeled mathematically? 
How can the conservation of momentum be used to predict the behavior of 
interacting objects? 
The motion of a body traveling with constant acceleration can be modeled using the 
suvat equations of uniformly accelerated motion. But what causes the acceleration? 
First we must introduce a second body, which interacts with the original body. When 
two bodies interact, we say that they exert forces on one another in accordance 
with Newton's three laws of motion. Forces can take many forms, but the presence 
of a force is required for one body to change the speed or course of another (an 
acceleration). 
The effect of the force depends upon its direction, so we use an arrow to represent the 
size and direction of a given force. By adding all the arrows together as vectors, we 
can calculate the overall size and direction of the resultant force. Using this direction 
of force and, therefore, acceleration in combination with the suvat equations, we can 
predict the new position and velocity of the original body. 
Momentum is the product of mass and velocity, two quantities that we met in the 
previous chapter. What makes it worth defining in its own right? Momentum is always 
conserved in any collision provided there are no external forces. This conservation is a 
direct consequence of Newton's three laws and can be used as a quick way to apply them. 
Nature of Science 
Newton's three laws of motion are a set of statements, based on observation 
and experiment, that can be used to predict the motion of a point object from 
the forces acting on it. 
Students should understand: 
Newton's three laws of motion 
forces as interactions between bodies 
forces acting on a body can be represented in a free-body diagram 
free-body diagrams can be analyzed to find the resultant force on a system 

=== PAGE 77 ===
the nature and use of the following contact forces: 
. normal force FN is the component of the contact force acting perpendicular to the surface 
that counteracts the body 
. surface frictional force Fr acting in a direction parallel to the plane of contact ben..,een a 
body and a surface, on a stationary body as given by Fr ~ µ.FN or a body in motion as 
given by 
Fr= µdFN whereµ, and µdare the coefficients of static and dynamic friction respectively 
. elastic restoring force Fr1 following Hooke's law as given by Fr1 = -kx where k is the spring 
constant 
. viscous drag force Fd acting on a small sphere opposing its motion through a fluid as 
given by Fd = 61r,,rv where 17 is the fluid viscosity, r is the radius of the sphere, and vis the 
velocity of the sphere through the fluid 
. buoyancy Fb acting on a body due to the displacement of the fluid as given by Fh = pVg 
where Vis the volume of fluid displaced 
the nature and use of the following field forces: 
. gravitational force Fg as the weight of the body and calculated as given by Fg = mg 
. electric force F • 
. magnetic force Fm 
linear momentum as given by p = m.v remains constant unless the system is acted upon by a 
resultant external force 
a resultant external force applied to a system constitutes an impulse J as given by J = F t::.t 
where Fis the average resultant force and t::.t is the time of contact 
the applied external impulse equals the change in momentum of the system 
Newton's second law in the form F = ma assumes mass is constant whereas F = ';:: allows for 
situations where mass is changing 
the elastic and inelastic collisions of two bodies 
explosions 
energy considerations in elastic collisions, inelastic collisions, and explosions 
bodies moving along a circular trajectory at a constant speed experience an acceleration that is 
directed radially toward the center of the circle - known as a centripetal acceleration as given 
vi 
., 
4n:2r 
bya =,.= 11)-r=T' 
circular motion is caused by a centripetal force acting perpendicular to the velocity 
a centripetal force causes the body to change direction even if its magnitude of velocity may 
remain constant 
the motion along a circular trajectory can be described in terms of the angular velocity w 
which is related to the linear speed v by the equation as given by v = 2;'" = wr. 
Hooke's law and the elastic restoring force is discussed in A.3. The definitions of 
elastic and inelastic collisions can also be found in A.3. Information about electric and 
magnetic forces can be found in 0 .2. 
31 

=== PAGE 78 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
A force is a push or 
a pull. 
The unit of force is 
the newton. 
A.2 Figure 1 Two 
astronauts and a red ball. 
If you hold an object 
of mass 100g in your 
hand. then you will be 
exerting an upward 
force of about one 
newton (l N) 
► 
Force 
We can now model the motion of a constantly accelerating body but what makes it 
accelerate? From experience, we know that to make something move we must push 
or pull it. We call this applying a force. One simple way of applying a force to a body 
is to attach a string and pull it. Imagine a sphere floating in space with two strings 
attached. The sphere will not start to move unless one of the astronauts pulls the string 
as in Figure 1. 
If A pulls the string, then the body will move to the left, and if B pulls the string, it will 
move to the right. We can see that force is a vector quantity since it has direction. 
Addition of forces 
Since force is a vector, we must add forces vectorially, so if A applies a force of 50 N 
and B applies a force of 60N, the resultant force will be ION toward B, as can be seen in 
Figure 2. 
SON 
60N 
SON~ 
... 
A.2 Figure 2 Astronaut B 
pulls harder than A. 
Astronauts in space 
are considered here 
so that no other 
forces(exceptfor 
very low gravity} are 
present. This makes 
things simpler. 
32 
SON 
► ION 
60N 
... 
60N 
A.2 Figure 3 Astronauts pulling at right angles. 
Or, in two dimensions, we can use trigonometry as in Figure 3. 
In this case, because the addition of forces forms a right-angled triangle, we can use 
Pythagoras to find x: 
X = J 502 + 602 = 78 N 

=== PAGE 79 ===
Taking components 
As with other vector quantities, we can calculate components of forces. For example, 
we might want to know the resultant force in a particular direction. 
In Figure 4, the component of the force in the x-direction is: Fx = 60 x cos 30° = 52 N 
This is particularly useful when we have several forces. 
-----------------------) 
-----------------------) 
X 
• 
A.2 Figure 4 Pulling at an angle. 
In the example shown in Figure 5, we can use components to calculate the resultant 
force in the x-direction: 60 x cos 30° + 50 x cos 30° = 52 + 43 = 95N 
Exercise 
QI. Find the resultant force in the following examples: 
(a) 
ION 
ION 
(b) 3L 
5N 
ION • 
Equilibrium 
If the resultant force on a body is zero, as in Figure 6, then we say the forces are 
balanced or the body is in equilibrium. 
SON 
SON 
SON 
SON 
X 
• 
A.2 Figure 5 Astronauts not 
pulling in line. 
A.2 Figure 6 Balanced 
forces. 
33 

=== PAGE 80 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
A.2 Figure 7 Three 
balanced forces 
SON 
70.7N 
SON 
• 
A.2 Figure 8 A free-body 
diagram of the forces in 
Figure 7. 
34 
Or with three forces as in Figure 7. 
70.7 N u 
70.7N 
In this example, the two blue forces are perpendicular, making the trigonometry easy. 
Adding all three forces gives a right-angled triangle. We can also see that if we take 
components in any direction, then the forces must be balanced. 
Taking components in the x-direction: 
- 50 X COS 45° - 50 X COS 45° + 70.7: - 35.35 - 35.35 + 70.7: 0 
Taking components in they-direction: 
50 x sin 45° - 50 x sin 45° = 0 
Free-body diagrams 
Problems often involve more than one body. For example, the previous problem involved 
four bodies, three astronauts, and one red ball. All of these bodies will experience forces, 
but if we draw them all on the diagram, it would be very confusing. For that reason, we 
only draw forces on the body we are interested in; in this case, the red ball. This is called a 
free-body diagram, as shown in Figure 8. Note that we treat the red ball as a point object 
by drawing the forces acting on the center. Not all forces actually act on the center, but 
when adding forces, it can be convenient to draw them as if they do. 
Exercise 
Q2. In the following examples, calculate the force F required to balance the forces. 
(a) 
(b) 
40N 
60N 
60N 
F 
F 

=== PAGE 81 ===
Q3. Calculate the resultant force for the following. 
(a) 
20N 
(b) 
40N 
4 
~
N 60N 
.. 
Q4. By resolving the vectors into components, calculate if the following bodies 
are in translational equilibrium or not. If not, calculate the resultant force. 
(a) 
8.66N 
(b) 
4N 
4N 
ION 
Q5. If the following two examples are in equilibrium, calculate the unknown 
forces F., F2 and F3• 
(a) 
45° 
45°', 
6N---'---• 
6N 
(b) 
Newton's first law of motion 
20N 
60N 
From observation, we can conclude that to make a body move we need to apply an 
unbalanced force to it. What is not so obvious is that onc,e moving it will continue 
to move with a constant velocity unless acted upon by another unbalanced force. 
Newton's first law of motion is a formal statement of this.: 
A body will remain at rest or moving with constant velocity unless acted upon by an unbalanced force. 
The reason that this is not obvious to us on Earth is that we do not tend to observe bodies 
traveling with constant velocity with no forces acting on them; in space, it would be 
more obvious. Newton's first law can be used in two ways. If the forces on a body are 
balanced, then we can use Newton's first law to predict that it will be at rest or moving 
with constant velocity. If the forces are unbalanced, then the body will not be at rest 
or moving with constant velocity. This means its velocity changes - in other words, it 
accelerates. Using the law the other way round, if a body accelerates, then Newton's first 
law predicts that the forces acting on the body are unbalanced. To apply this law in real 
situations, we need to know a bit more about the different types of force. 
A law in physics is 
a very useful tool. If 
applied properly. it 
enables us to make a 
very strong argument 
that what we say is 
true. If asked 'will a box 
move?' you can say that 
you think it will and 
someone else could 
say it will not. You both 
have your opinions 
and you would then 
argue as to who is right. 
However, if you say 
that Newton's law says 
it will move. then you 
have a much stronger 
argument (assuming 
you have applied the 
law correctly) 
35 

=== PAGE 82 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
A 
A.2 Figure 9 Exerting 
tension with a string. 
F ' 
A 
A.2 Figure 10 A normal 
reaction force is exerted 
when a hand is in contact 
with a ball. 
F 
g 
the ground 
A 
A.2 Figure 11 A ball in 
free fall. 
A 
Types of force 
Tension 
Tension is the name of the force exerted by the astronauts on the red ball. If you attach 
a string to a body and pull it, then you are exerting tension, as in Figure 9. 
Normal reaction 
Whenever two surfaces are in contact with (touching) each other, there will be a force 
between them. This force is perpendicular to the surface so it is called the normal 
reaction force. If the astronaut pushes the ball with his hand as in Figure 10, then 
there will be a normal reaction between the hand and the ball. 
Note that the force acts on both surfaces so the astronaut will also experience a normal 
force. However, since we are interested in the ball, not the astronaut, we take the ball as 
our 'free body' so only draw the forces acting on it. 
Gravitational force (weight) 
Back on Earth, if a body is released above the ground as in Figure 11, it accelerates 
downward. According to Newton's first law, there must be an unbalanced force 
causing this motion. This force is called the weight. The weight of a body is directly 
proportional to its mass: Fg = mg where gravitational field strength, g = 9.81 N kg-1 close 
to the surface of the Earth. Note that this is the same as the acceleration of free fall. You 
will find out why later on. 
Note that the weight acts at th e center of the body. 
If a block is at rest on the floor, then Newton's first law implies that the forces are balanced. 
The forces involved are weight ,(because the block has mass and is on the Earth) and 
normal force (because the block is in contact with the ground). Figure 12 shows the forces. 
A 
A 
F ' 
I 
A.2 Figure 12 A free-body diagram of 
a box resting on the ground. 
A.2 Figure 13 A string applies an 
upward force on the box. 
A.2 Figure 14 The block is lifted as 
the tension is bigger than its weight. 
36 
These forces are balanced so: -Fg + FN = 0 or Fg = FN 
If the mass of the block is increased, then the normal reaction will also increase. 
If a string is added to the block, then we can exert tension on the block as in Figure 13. 
The forces are still balanced since F, + FN = Fg. Notice how Fg has remained the same but 
FN has got smaller. If we pull with more force, we can lift the block as in Figure 14. At 
this point, the normal reaction FN will be zero. The block is no longer in contact with 
the ground; now F, = F8• 

=== PAGE 83 ===
The block in Figure 15 is on an inclined plane (slope) so the weight still acts downward. 
In this case, it might be convenient to split the weight into components, one acting 
parallel to the slope and one acting perpendicular to the slope. 
The component of weight perpendicular to the slope is Fg cos e. Since there is no 
movement in this direction, the force is balanced by FN. The component of weight 
parallel to the slope is Fg sin e. This force is unbalanced, causing the block to accelerate 
parallel to the slope. If the angle of the slope is increased, then sin e will also increase, 
resulting in a greater force down the slope. 
Electric and magnetic forces 
Electric forces act on charged particles. Magnetic forces act on moving charged 
particles and magnetic materials. 
Like weight (i.e. gravitational forces), electric and magnetic forces act at a distance. 
Unlike weight, they can be attractive and repulsive. 
Friction 
There are two types of friction: static friction, which is the force that stops the relative 
motion between two touching surfaces, and dynamic friction, which opposes the 
relative motion between two touching surfaces. In both cases, the force is related to 
both the normal force and the nature of the surfaces, so pushing two surfaces together 
increases the friction between them. 
Fr= µFN where J.l is the coefficient of friction (static or dynamic). 
Dynamic friction 
In Figure 16, a block is being pulled along a table at a constant velocity. 
FN 
FN 
FN 
F, . 
µ/N 
µ/N 
~ 
~ 
21:dF N 
I 
-
, 
F 
F 
I 
2F 
,, 
g 
~ 
~ 
F I 
. 
I 
A.2 Figure 17 Two blocks Joined with a rope 
A.2 Figure 18 Two blocks on top of 
each other. 
Since the velocity is constant, Newton's first law implies that the forces are balanced so 
F, = Fr and Fg = FN. Notice that friction does not depend on the area of contact. We can 
show this by considering two identical blocks sliding at constant velocity across a table 
top joined together by a rope as in Figure 17. The friction under each cube is µdFN so 
the total friction would be 21-1dFN. 
If one cube is now placed on top of the other as in Figure 18, the normal force under 
the bottom cube will be twice as much so the friction is now 21-1dFN. It does not matter 
if the blocks are side by side Oarge area of contact) or on top of each other (small area 
of contact); the friction is the same. 
A.2 Figure 15 Free-body 
diagram for a block on a 
slope 
What assumptions 
(NOS} about the forces 
between molecules of 
gas allow for ideal gas 
behavior? (B.3) 
F, 
F s 
V 
F, 
F s 
A.2 Figure 16 The force 
experienced by a block 
pulled along a table. 
37 

=== PAGE 84 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
A.2 Figure 19 µFN is the 
maximum size of friction. 
A.2 Figure 20 A block rests 
on a slope until the forces 
become unbalanced. 
.A. 
A.2 Figure 21 Friction 
pushes the car forwards. 
38 
If this is the case, then why do racing cars have wide tires with no tread pattern (slicks)? 
There are several reasons for this, but one is to increase the friction between the tires 
and the road. This is strange because friction is not supposed to depend on area of 
contact. In practice, friction is not so simple. When one of the surfaces is sticky like the 
tires of a racing car, the force does depend upon the surface area. The type of surfaces 
we are concerned with here are quite smooth, non-sticky surfaces like wood and 
metal. 
Static friction 
If a very small force is applied to a block at rest on the ground, it will not move. This 
means that the forces on the block are balanced (Newton's first law): the applied force 
is balanced by the static friction. 
at rest 
at rest 
acceleration 
W, 
F ' 
F 
F ' 
' 
.. 
F, 
WN 
r 
1 
In this case, the friction simply equals the applied force: Fr= F,. As the applied force 
is increased, the friction will also increase. However, there will be a point when the 
friction cannot be any bigger. If the applied force is increased past that point, the block 
will start to move; the forces have become unbalanced as illustrated in Figure 19. 
The maximum value that friction can have is µ.FN where ,u. is the coefficient of static 
friction. The value of static friction is always greater than dynamic friction. This can 
easily be demonstrated with a block on an inclined plane as shown in Figure 20. 
<1 
In the first example, the friction is balancing the component of weight down the 
plane, which equals Fg sin e, where e is the angle of the slope. As the angle of the slope 
is increased, the point is reached where the static friction = µsFN. The forces are still 
balanced but the friction cannot get any bigger, so if the angle is increased further, the 
forces become unbalanced and the block will start to move. Once the block moves, the 
friction becomes dynamic friction. Dynamic friction is less than static friction, so this 
results in a bigger resultant force down the slope, causing the block to accelerate. 
Friction does not just slow things down; it is also the force that makes things move. 
Consider the tire of a car as it starts to drive away from the traffic lights. The rubber of 
the tire is trying to move relative to the road. In fact, if there was no friction, the wheel 
would spin as the tire slipped backward on the road. The force of friction that opposes 
the motion of the tire slipping backward on the road is therefore in the forward 
direction . 

=== PAGE 85 ===
If the static friction between the tire and the road is not big enough, the tire will slip. 
Once this happens, the friction becomes dynamic friction, which is less than static 
friction, so once tires start to slip, they tend to continue slipping. 
Buoyancy 
Buoyancy is the name of the force experienced by 
a body totally or partially immersed in a fluid (a 
fluid is a liquid or gas). The size of this force is equal 
to the weight of fluid displaced. It is this force that 
enables a boat to float and a helium balloon to rise 
in the air. Let us consider a football and a bucket 
full of water. 
@ il 
... 
A.2 Figure 22 A football immersed in 
a bucket of water. 
If you take the football and push it under the water, then water will flow out of the 
bucket 0uckily a big bowl was placed there to catch it). The weight of this displaced 
water is equal to the upward force on the ball. To keep the ball under water, you would 
therefore have to balance that force by pushing the ball down. 
The forces on a floating object are balanced so the weight must equal the buoyant 
force. This means that the ball must have displaced its own weight of water as in 
Figure 23. 
Fg=pVg 
where Vis the volume of fluid displaced and p is the density of the fluid. 
Air resistance 
Air resistance is the force that opposes the motion of a body through the air. More 
broadly, this is known as fluid resistance or drag. The size of this force depends on 
the speed, size, and shape of the body. At low speeds, the drag force experienced by a 
sphere is given by Stokes' law: 
where 1/ = viscosity (a constant) 
v = velocity 
r = radius 
When a balloon is dropped, it accelerates downward due to the force of gravity. As it 
falls through the air, it experiences a drag force opposing its motion. As the balloon's 
velocity gets bigger so does the drag force, until the drag force balances its weight, at 
which point its velocity will remain constant (Figure 24). This maximum velocity is 
called its terminal velocity. 
The same thing happens when a parachutist jumps out of a plane. The terminal 
velocity in this case is around 54 m s- 1 (195 km h-1) . Opening the parachute increases 
the drag force, which slows the parachutist down to a safer 10 m s-1 for landing. 
... 
A.2 Figure 23 A football 
A oats in a bucket of water. 
Fg 
Fs 
Ftl 
Ftl 
Fb 
Fb 
... 
A.2 Figure 24 A balloon 
reaches terminal velocity as 
the forces become balanced. 
Notice the buoyant force is 
also present. 
39 

=== PAGE 86 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
A.2 Figure 25 The forces 
acting on a car traveling at 
constant velocity. 
... 
A.2 Figure 26 Stretching a 
spring 
Speed skiers wear special 
clothes and squat down like 
this to reduce air resistance. 
How does the 
application of a restoring 
force acting on a 
particle result in simple 
harmonic motion? (C.1) 
JON 
... 
A.2 Figure 27 A ball on a 
string that is pulled to the 
side. 
40 
► 
As it is mainly the air resistance that limits the top speed of a car, a lot of time and 
money is spent by car designers to try to reduce this force. This is particularly 
important at high speeds when the drag force is related to the square of the speed. 
FN 
Fd 
Fr 
Fr 
► 
Fg 
Elastic restoring force 
An elastic restoring force, FH, acts when the shape of an object is changed. An object is 
stretched when in tension and squashed when in compression. The size of the elastic 
restoring force increases with the extension (or compression) from the original length . 
Exercise 
Q6. A ball of weight 10 N is suspended on a string and pulled to one side by 
another horizontal string as shown in Figure 27. If the forces are balanced: 
(a) write an equation for the horizontal components of the forces acting on 
the ball 
(b) write an equation for the vertical components of the forces acting on 
the ball 
(c) use the second equation to calculate the tension in the upper string, F, 
(d) use your answer to (c) plus the first equation to find the horizontal force F. 
Q7. The condition for the forces to be balanced is that the 
sum of components of the forces in any two 
perpendicular components is zero. In the 'box on a 
ramp' example, the vertical and horizontal 
components were taken. However, it is sometimes 
more convenient to consider components parallel 
and perpendicular to the ramp. 
SON 

=== PAGE 87 ===
Consider the situation in the figure. If the forces on this box are balanced: 
(a) write an equation for the components of the forces parallel to the ramp 
(b) write an equation for the forces perpendicular to the ramp 
(c) use your answers to find the friction (Fr) and normal force (FN)-
Q8. A rock climber is hanging from a rope attached to the cliff by two bolts as 
shown in Figure 28. If the forces are balanced: 
(a) write an equation for the vertical component of the forces on the knot 
(b) write an equation for the horizontal forces exerted on the knot 
(c) calculate the tension F1 in the ropes joined to the bolts. 
The result of this calculation shows why ropes should not be connected in 
this way. 
The relationship between force and acceleration 
Newton's first law states that a body will accelerate if an unbalanced force is applied to 
it. Newton's second law tells us how big the acceleration will be and in which direction. 
Before we look in detail at Newton's second law, we should look at the factors that affect 
the acceleration of a body when an unbalanced force is applied. Let us consider the 
example of catching a ball. When we catch the ball, we change its velocity, Newton's first 
law tells us that we must therefore apply an unbalanced force to the ball. The size of that 
force depends upon two things: the mass and the velocity. A heavy ball is more difficult 
to stop than a light one traveling at the same speed, and a fast one is harder to stop than a 
slow one. Rather than having to concern ourselves with two quantities, we will introduce 
a new quantity that incorporates both mass and velocity: momentum. 
Nature of Science 
The principle of conservation of momentum is a consequence of Newton's 
laws of motion applied to the collision between two bodies. If this applies to 
two isolated bodies, we can generalize that it applies to any number of isolated 
bodies. Here we will consider colliding balls but it also applies to collisions 
between microscopic particles such as atoms. 
Momentum (p) 
Momentum is defined as the product of mass and velocity: 
p = mv 
The unit of momentum is kg m s- 1• Momentum is a vector quantity. 
Impulse 
When you get hit by a ball, the effect it has on you is greater if the ball bounces off you 
than if you catch it. This is because the change of momentum, .6.p, is greater when the 
ball bounces, as shown in Figure 29. 
The unit of impulse is kg m s- 1• 
Impulse, J, is the change in momentum and is equal to the product of force and the 
time over which the force is acting. It is a vector. 
J = .6.p = F.6.t 
... 
A.2 Figure 28 The rope is 
attached at two bolts. 
41 

=== PAGE 88 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
V --
V --
Before 
.... 
V --
0 
After 
A.2 Figure 29 The change 
of momentum of the red ball 
is greater 
A.2 Figure 30 A ball gains 
momentum. 
If force= 
change in momentum 
time 
then change in 
momentum= 
force x time. 
So the unit of 
momentum is N s. 
42 
This is the same 
as kgms·1• 
► 
Red ball 
momentum before = mv 
momentum after= - mv (remember momentum is a vector) 
change in momentum, J = -mv - mv = - 2mv 
Blue ball 
momentum before = mv 
momentum after= 0 
change in momentum, J = 0 - mv = - mv 
Exercise 
Q9. A ball of mass 200g traveling at lOms-1 bounces off a wall as in Figure 29. 
If after hitting the wall it travels at 5 m s-1, what is the impulse? 
QlO. Calculate the impulse on a tennis racket that hits a ball of mass 67 g traveling 
at 10 m s-1 so that it comes off the racket at a velocity of 50 m s-1• 
Newton's second law of motion 
The rate of change of momentum of a body is directly proportional to the unbalanced force acting on 
that body and takes place in same direction. 
Let us once again consider a ball with a constant force acting on it as in Figure 30. 
II 
a 
)) 
V 
0---: 
0---: 
time=O 
time =t 
s 
Newton's first law tells us that there must be an unbalanced force acting on the ball 
since it is accelerating. 
Newton's second law tells us that the size of the unbalanced force is directly 
proportional to the rate of change of momentum. We know that the force is constant 
so the rate of change of momentum is also constant, which, since the mass is also 
constant, implies that the acceleration is uniform so the suvat equations apply. 
If the ball has mass, m we can calculate the change of momentum of the ball. 
initial momentum = mu 
final momentum = mv 
change in momentum = mv - mu 
mv-mu 
The time taken is t so the rate of change of momentum = ---
t 

=== PAGE 89 ===
This is the same as m(v - u) = ma 
t 
Newton's second law states that the rate of change of momentum is proportional to 
the force, so F ex ma. 
To make things simple, the newton is defined so that the constant of proportionality is 
equal to 1 so: 
F=ma 
So when a force is applied to a body in this way, Newton's second law can be simplified to: 
The aaeleration of a body is proportional to the force applied and inverse!), proportional to its mass. 
Not all examples are so simple. Consider a jet of water hitting a wall as in Figure 31. 
The water hits the wall and loses its momentum, ending up in a puddle on the floor. 
Newton's first law tells us that since the velocity of the water is changing, there must be 
a force on the water, 
Newton's second law tells us that the size of the force is equal to the rate of change 
of momentum. The rate of change of momentum in this case is equal to the amount 
of water hitting the wall per second multiplied by the change in velocity. This is not 
the same as ma. For this reason, it is best to use the first, more general, statement of 
Newton's second law, since this can always be applied. 
However, in this course, most of the examples will be of the F = ma type. 
Example 1: Elevator accelerating upward 
An elevator has an upward acceleration of 1 ms-2. If the mass of the elevator is 500kg, 
what is the tension in the cables pulling it up? 
First draw a free-body diagram as in Figure 32. Now we can see what forces are acting. 
Newton's first law tells us that the forces must be unbalanced. Newton's second law 
tells us that the unbalanced force must be in the direction of the acceleration (upward). 
This means that F, is bigger than mg. 
Newton's second law also tells us that the size of the unbalanced force equals ma so we 
get the equation: 
F,-mg= ma 
Rearranging gives: 
F, = mg + ma 
= 500 X 10 + 500 X 1 
= 5500N 
• 
V 
~ 
A.2 Figure 31 A jet 
becomes a puddle. 
F, 
mg 
• 
A.2 Figure 32 An elevator 
accelerating upward. This 
could either be going up 
getting faster or going down 
getting slower. 
43 

=== PAGE 90 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
mg 
... 
A.2 Figure 33 The elevator 
with downward acceleration. 
Mg 
• 
a 
)) 
A.2 Figure 34 Two masses 
are joined by a rope. 
1200N 
600N 
... 
A.2 Figure 35 The 
parachutist just after o pening 
the parachute. 
44 
Example 2: Elevator accelerating downward 
The same elevator as in Example 1 now has a downward acceleration of 1 m s-2 as in 
Figure 33. 
This time, Newton's laws tell us that the weight is bigger than the tension so: 
mg-F,=ma 
Rearranging gives: 
F, = mg-ma 
= 500 X 10 - 500 X 1 
=4500N 
Example 3: Joined masses 
Two masses are joined by a rope. One of the masses sits on a frictionless table, while 
the other hangs off the edge as in Figure 34. 
Mis being dragged to the edge of the table by m. 
Both are connected to the same rope so F1 is the same for both masses. This also means 
that the acceleration a is the same. 
We do not need to consider FN and mg for the mass on the table because these forces 
are balanced. However, the horizontally unbalanced force is F, . 
Applying Newton's laws to the mass on the table gives: 
F, =ma 
The hanging mass is accelerating down so mg is bigger than F,. Newton's second law 
implies that: mg - F, = ma 
mg 
Substituting for F, gives: mg - ma = ma so a= M + m 
Example 4: The free fall parachutist 
After falling freely for some time, a free fall parachutist, whose weight is 60 kg, opens his 
parachute. Suddenly, the force due to air resistance increases to 1200N. What happens? 
Looking at the free-body diagram in Figure 35, we can see that the forces are 
unbalanced and that, according to Newton's second law, the acceleration, a, will 
be upward. 
The size of the acceleration is given by: 
ma = 1200 - 600 = 60 x a 
So: 
a= lOms-2 
The acceleration is in the opposite direction to the motion. This will cause the 
parachutist to slow down. As he slows down, the air resistance gets less until the forces 
are balanced. He will then continue down with a constant velocity. 

=== PAGE 91 ===
Exercise 
Qll. The helium in a balloon causes an upthrust of0.l N. If the mass of the 
balloon and helium is 6 g, calculate the acceleration of the balloon. 
Q 12. A rope is used to pull a felled tree (mass 50 kg) along the ground. A tension 
of 1000 N causes the tree to move from rest to a velocity of 0.1 m s-1 in 2 s. 
Calculate the force due to friction acting on the tree. 
Ql3. Two masses are arranged on a frictionless table as shown in the figure on the 
right. Calculate: 
(a) the acceleration of the masses 
(b) the tension in the string. 
Q 14. A helicopter is lifting a load of mass 1000 kg with a rope. The rope is strong 
enough to hold a force of 12 kN. What is the maximum upward acceleration 
of the helicopter? 
Q 15. A person of mass 65 kg is standing in an elevator that is accelerating upwards 
at0.5 ms-2• 
What is the normal force between the floor and the person? 
Ql6. A plastic ball is held under the water by a child in a swimming pool. The 
volume of the ball is 4000cm3• 
(a) If the density of water is 1000 kg m-3, calculate the buoyant force on the 
ball (buoyant force = weight of fluid displaced). 
(b) If the mass of the ball is 250 g, calculate the theoretical acceleration of the 
ball when it is released. Why will the ball not accelerate this quickly in a 
real situation? 
◄ Even before opening their 
parachutes. base j umpers 
reach terminal velocity. 
5kg 
45 

=== PAGE 92 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
• 
A.2 Figure 36 Apparatus 
for finding the relationship 
between force and 
acceleration. 
A.2 Figure 37 Graph of 
tension against acceleration. 
~1.2 
= 
0 
-~ I.I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
V .. 
1.0 
slope = 0.521 Nm I s' 
y-intercept = 0.055 N 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
L 
0.6 
.. 
0.5 
.. 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
J 
It is not easy to apply a constant known force to a moving body: just try pulling a cart along 
the table with a force meter and you will see. One way this is often done in the laboratory is 
by hanging a mass over the edge of the table as shown in Figure 36. 
If we ignore any friction in the pulley or in the wheels of the trolley, then the unbalanced 
force on the trolley= F,. Since the mass is accelerating down. then the weight is bigger than F, 
so Fg - F, = ma where mis the mass hanging on the string. The tension is therefore given by: 
F, = mg - ma = m(g - a) 
There are several ways to measure the acceleration of the trolley: one is to use a motion 
sensor. This senses the position of the trolley by reflecting an ultrasonic pulse off it. Knowing 
the speed of the pulse. the software can calculate the distance between the trolley and 
sensor. As the trolley moves away from the sensor, the time taken for the pulse to return 
increases; the software calculates the velocity from these changing times. Using this 
apparatus, the acceleration of the trolley for different masses was measured. and the results 
are given in the Table 1. 
A.2Table 1 
• 
(F1 = mg - ma)/N 
0.0100 
0.10 
0.097 
0.098 
0.096 
0.001 
0.0500 
0.74 
0.454 
0.453 
0.451 
0.001 
0.0600 
0.92 
0.533 
0.532 
0.531 
0.001 
0.1000 
1.49 
0.832 
0.830 
0.828 
0.001 
0.1500 
2.12 
1.154 
1.150 
1.148 
0.001 
The uncertainty in mass is g iven by the last decimal place in the scale, and the uncertainty in 
acceleration by repeating one run several times. To calculate the uncertainty in tension, the 
. 
Nm 1s2 
intercept = 0.0 199 N 
maximum and minimum values have been 
calculated by adding and subtracting the 
uncertainties. 
These results are shown in Figure 37. 
Applying Newton's second law to the trolley, 
the relationship between F, and a should be 
F, = ma where m is the mass of the trolley. This 
implies that the gradient of the line should be m. 
From the graph. we can see that the gradient is 
0.52 ± 002 kg, which is quite close to the 0.5 kg 
mass of the trolley. 
According to theory. the intercept should be (0, O) 
but we can see that there is a positive intercept of 
0.05 N. It appears that each value is 0.05 N too big. 
The reason for this could be friction. If there was 
friction, then the actual unbalanced force acting 
on the trolley would be tension - friction. If this is 
the case, then the results would imply that friction 
is about 0.05 N. 
0.1 
slope = 0.50 I N m-1 s' 
y-intercept = 0.072 N 
J + 
J 
0 
0 
0.5 
46 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
acceleration/m s-2 

=== PAGE 93 ===
Newton's third law of motion 
When dealing with Newton's first and second laws, we are careful to consider only the 
body that is experiencing the forces, not the body that is exerting the forces. Newton's 
third law relates these forces. 
if body A exerts aforce on body B, then body B will exert an equal and opposite force on body A. 
So if someone is pushing a car with a force Fas shown in Figure 38, the car will 
push back on the person with a force -F. In this case, both of these forces are normal to 
the car's surface. 
- F 
You might think that, since these forces are equal and opposite, they will be balanced, 
and, in that case, how does the person get the car moving? This is wrong. The forces act 
on different bodies so cannot balance each other. 
In summary, a Newton's third law pair is made up of two forces of the same type and 
magnitude acting in opposite directions on different bodies. 
Example 1: A falling body 
A body falls freely toward the ground as in Figure 39. If we 
ignore air resistance, there is only one force acting on the 
body- the force due to the gravitational attraction of the 
Earth, which we call weight. 
Applying Newton's third law 
If the Earth pulls the body down, then the body must pull 
the Earth up with an equal and opposite force. We have seen 
that the gravitational force always acts on the center of the 
body, so Newton's third law implies that there must be a 
force equal to F8 acting upward on the center of the Earth 
as in Figure 40. 
Example 2: A box rests on the floor 
• 
A 
A.2 Figure 40 The Earth 
pulled up by gravity 
A box sits on the floor as shown in Figure 41. Let us apply Newton's third law to this 
situation. 
There are two forces acting on the box. 
Normal force: The floor is pushing up on the box with a force FN. According to 
Newton's third law, the box must therefore push down on the floor with a force of 
magnitude FN. 
If experimental 
measurements contain 
uncertainties. how can 
laws be developed 
based on experimental 
evidence? {NOS) 
It is very important to 
realize that Newton's 
third law is about 
two bodies. Avoid 
statements of this law 
that do not mention 
anything about there 
being two bodies. 
A.2 Figure 38 The man 
pushes the car and the car 
pushes the man. 
A 
A.2 Figure 39 A falling 
body pulled down by gravity. 
A 
A.2 Figure 41 Forces acting 
on a box resting on the floor. 
47 

=== PAGE 94 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
Students often think 
that Newton's third law 
implies that the normal 
force = -weight, but 
both of these forces act 
on the box. If the box 
is at rest, these forces 
are indeed equal and 
opposite but this is due 
to Newton's first law. 
A boat tests its water cannons. 
water 
string 
.. 
A.2 Figure 43 A table 
tennis ball attached to a mass 
balance. 
48 
Weight: The Earth is pulling the box down with a force F8. 
According to Newton's third law, the box must be pulling 
the Earth up with a force of magnitude F8 as shown in 
Figure 42. 
Example 3: Recoil of a gun 
When a gun is fired, the velocity of the bullet changes. 
Newton's first law implies that there must be an unbalanced 
force on the bullet. This force must come from the gun. 
Newton's third law says that if the gun exerts a force on the 
bullet, the bullet must exert an equal and opposite force on 
the gun. This is the force that makes the gun recoil or 
'kick back'. 
Example 4: The water cannon 
.. 
A.2 Figure 42 Forces acting 
on the Earth according to 
Newton's third law. 
When water is sprayed at a wall from a hosepipe, it hits the wall and stops. Newton's 
first law says that if the velocity of the water changes, there must be an unbalanced 
force on the water. This force comes from the wall. Newton's third law says that if the 
wall exerts a force on the water, then the water will exert a force on the wall. This is the 
force that makes a water cannon so effective at dispersing demonstrators. 
Exercise 
Ql 7. Use Newton's first and third laws to explain the following: 
(a) When burning gas is forced downward out of a rocket motor, the rocket 
accelerates up. 
(b) When the water cannons on the boat in the photo are operating, the boat 
accelerates forward. 
(c) When you step forwards off a skateboard, the skateboard accelerates 
backward. 
(d) A table tennis ball is immersed in a fluid and held down by a string as 
shown in Figure 4 3. The container is placed on a balance. What will 
happen to the reading of the balance if the string breaks? 

=== PAGE 95 ===
Collisions 
In this section, we have been dealing with the interaction between two bodies 
(gun-bullet, skater-skateboard, hose-water). To develop our understanding of the 
interaction between bodies, let us consider a simple collision between two balls as 
illustrated in Figure 44. 
u, 
lh 
----.:...+ 
Before Q 0 
m, 
'"2 
During 
F, • 
Let us apply Newton's three laws to this problem. 
Newton's first law 
• 
F2 
~ 
V2 
Afte1· Q 0 
In the collision, the red ball slows down and the blue ball speeds up. Newton's first law 
tells us that this means there is a force acting to the left on the red ball (F1) and to the 
right on the blue ball (Fi). 
Newton's second law 
This law tells us that the force will be equal to the rate of change of momentum of the 
balls so if the balls are touching each other for a time Lu: 
m 1V1 -m1u1 
F1 = 
11t 
Newton's third law 
According to the third law, if the red ball exerts a force on the blue ball, then the blue 
ball will exert an equal and opposite force on the red ball. 
Rearranging gives: 
In other words, the momentum at the start equals the momentum at the end. 
We find that this applies not only to this example but to all interactions. 
A.2 Figure 44 Collision 
between two balls. 
An isolated system 
is one in which no 
external forces are 
acting When a ball hits 
a wall, the momentum 
of the ball is not 
conserved because the 
ball and wall is not an 
isolated system. since 
the wall is attached 
to the ground. If the 
ball and wall were 
floating in space, then 
momentum would be 
conserved. 
49 

=== PAGE 96 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
How are concepts 
of equilibrium and 
conseNation applied to 
understand matter and 
motion from the smallest 
atom to the whole 
Universe? {B.3, D.1) 
In which way is 
conseNation of 
momentum relevant to 
the workings of a nuclear 
power station? (E4) 
When dealing with 
circular motion in 
physics, we always 
measure the angle in 
radians. 
/,/,,,,,,,, 
/ 
I 
' ,,,',,, 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
\ f 
V 
B 
I 
\ 
\ 
\ 
' ' .. 
' ', 
// / A 1/v 
A.2 Figure 45 Although 
speed is constant, velocity is 
changing because direction is 
changing. 
50 
The law of the conservation of momentum 
For a system of isolated bodies, the total momentum is always the same. 
This is not a new law since it is really just a combination of Newton's laws. However, 
it provides a useful short cut when solving problems. 
In many examples, we will have to pretend everything is in space isolated from the 
rest of the Universe, otherwise they are not isolated and the law of conservation of 
momentum will not apply. 
You may have noticed that some collisions enable the bodies to bounce off one 
another, while there are other collisions where the bodies stick together. This is 
discussed further in A.3 Work, energy and power. 
Nature of Science 
By applying what we know about motion in a straight line, we can develop a 
model for motion in a circle. This is a common way that models are developed 
in physics: start simple and add complexity later. 
Circular motion 
If a car travels around a bend at 30 km h-1, it is obviously traveling at a constant speed, 
since the speedometer registers 30 km h-1 all the way round. However, it is not traveling 
at constant velocity. This is because velocity is a vector quantity, and for a vector 
quantity to be constant, both magnitude and direction must remain the same. Bends 
in a road can be many different shapes, but, to simplify things, we will only consider 
circular bends taken at constant speed. 
Quantities of circular motion 
Consider the body in Figure 45 traveling in a circle radius r, with constant speed v. 
In time flt, the body moves from A to B. As it does this, the radius sweeps out an 
angle !le. 
\.Vhen describing motion in a circle, we often use quantities referring to the angular 
motion rather than the linear motion. These quantities are: 
Time period (n 
The time period is the time taken to complete one circle. 
The unit of the time period is the second. 
Angular displacement (0) 
The angular displacement is the angle swept out by a line joining the body to 
the center. 
The unit of angular displacement is the radian. 

=== PAGE 97 ===
Angular velocity (w) 
The angular velocity is the angle swept out by per unit time. 
The unit of angular displacement is the radian s-1• 
tie 
(t) = Lii" 
The angle swept out when the body completes a circle is 2n and the time taken is by 
definition the time period Tso this equation can also be written: 
2JC 
(t) = -
T 
Frequency (f) 
The frequency is the number of complete revolutions per unit time. 
f =!_ 
T 
So: 
(t) = mf 
Angular velocity and speed 
In a time T, the body in Figure 46 completes one full circle so it travels a distance brr, 
h 
• 
c 
f h 
. l S 
d . d f· 
d 
h discancetraveled 
brr I 
h" 
t e cJrcumrerence o t e circ e. pee 1s e me as t e 
. 
k 
so v = -. n t 1s 
11me ta en 
T 
time, a line joining the body to the center will sweep out an angle of 2n radians so the 
angular velocity, ul = 21' . Substituting into the equation for v we get: 
T 
V = ulf 
Although the speed is constant, when a body moves in a circle, its direction 
and velocity are always changing. At any moment in time, the magnitude of the 
instantaneous velocity is equal to the speed and the direction is perpendicular to the 
radius of the circle. 
Centripetal acceleration 
From the definition of acceleration, we know that if the velocity of a body changes, 
it must be accelerating, and that the direction of acceleration is in the direction of the 
change in velocity. Let us consider a body moving in a circle with a constant speed v. 
Figure 46 shows two positions of the body separated by a short time. 
To derive the equation for this acceleration, let us consider a very small angular 
displacement 88 as represented by Figure 47. 
r f ' 
I 
6v 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Why is no work done 
on a body moving along 
a circular trajectory at 
constant speed? (A.3) 
.,,..------
' ' ' ' ' \ 
' I 
I 
I 
\ 
\,',,, 
/_,,,,,, A 1/v 
-------
• 
A.2 Figure 46 A body 
travels at constant speed 
around a circle of radius r. 
◄ 
A.2 Figure 47 Angular 
displacement. 
51 

=== PAGE 98 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
if Bis small then B = f 
.. 
A.2 Figure 48 A small angle 
approximation. 
You will not be asked 
to reproduce this 
derivation in the exam. 
52 
If this small an8
ular displacement has taken place in a short time 8t, then the angular 
velocity, eu = ~ -
6t 
change of velocity 
From the definition of acceleration: a = - ~~.---~ 
time 
If we took only the magnitude of velocity, then the change of velocity would be zero. 
However, velocity is a vector so change in velocity is found by taking the final velocity 
vector - initial velocity vector as in the vector addition in Figure 48. This triangle is not 
a right-angled triangle so cannot be solved using Pythagoras. However, since the angle 
80 is small, we can say that the angle 80 in radians is approximately equal to ~v-
Rearranging gives: 
8v =v80 
8v v80 
acceleration = 8t = 8t 
a= veu 
But we know that v = eur so we can substitute for v and get a = eu2r 
Or substituting for: 
V 
eu= -r 
v2 
a= -r 
The direction of this acceleration is in the direction of 8v. Now, as the angle 80 is small, 
the angle between 8v and vis approximately 90°, which implies that the acceleration 
is perpendicular to the velocity. This makes it directed toward the center of the circle; 
hence the name centripetal acceleration. 
Exercise 
Ql8. A body travels with constant speed of 2 m s- 1 around a circle of radius 5 m. 
Calculate: 
(a) the distance moved in one revolution 
(b) the displacement in one revolution 
(c) the time taken for one revolution 
(d) the frequency of the motion 
(e) the angular velocity 
(f) the centripetal acceleration. 
Centripetal force 
From Newton's first law, we know that if a body accelerates, there must be an 
unbalanced force acting on it. The second law tells us that this force is in the direction 
of the acceleration. This implies that there must be a resultant force acting toward the 
center. This force is called the centripetal force. 
mv2 
From Newton's second law, we can also deduce that F = ma so F = -
= meu2r. 
r 

=== PAGE 99 ===
Examples of circular motion 
All bodies moving in a circle must be acted upon by a force toward the center of the 
circle. However, this can be provided by many different forces. 
Mass on a string in space 
• 
A.2 Figure 49 An astronaut playing with 
a mass on a string. 
• 
A.2 Figure SO The string breaks. 
If you take a mass on the end of a string, you can 
easily make it move in a circle, but the presence 
of gravity makes the motion difficult to analyze. 
It will be simpler if we start by considering what 
this would be like if performed by an astronaut 
in deep space: much more difficult to do but 
easier to analyze. Figure 49 shows an astronaut 
making a mass move in a circle on the end of a 
string. The only force acting on the mass is the 
tension in the string. 
In this case, it is obvious that the centripetal 
force is provided by the tension so: 
mv2 
F = -
' 
r 
From this, we can predict that the force 
required to keep the mass in its circular motion 
will increase if the speed increases. This will 
be felt by the astronaut who, according to 
Newton's third law, must be experiencing an 
equal and opposite force on the other end of the 
string. If the string were to break, the ball would 
have no forces acting on it so would travel at a 
constant velocity in the same direction as it was 
moving when the break occurred. This would 
be at some tangent to the circle as in Figure 50. 
Mass on a string on the Earth (horizontal) 
When playing with a mass on a string on the Earth, there will be gravity acting as well 
as tension. We will first consider how this changes the motion when the mass is made 
to travel in a horizontal circle as in Figure 51. 
For the motion to be horizontal, there will be no vertical acceleration so the weight 
must be balanced by the vertical component of tension (F, cos e = mg). This means 
that the string cannot be horizontal but will always be at an angle, as shown in 
Figure 51. T~e centripetal force is provided by the horizontal component of tension 
(F, sin e = m;\ which is equal to the vector sum of the two forces. 
How can knowledge of 
electric and magnetic 
forces al low the 
prediction of changes to 
the motion of charged 
particles? (D.2) 
In this example, 
the astronaut has a 
much larger mass 
than the ball. If this 
was not the case, 
the astronaut would 
be pulled out of 
position by the equal 
and opposite force 
acting on the other 
end of the string . 
People often think 
that the mass will fly 
outward if the string 
breaks. This is because 
they feel themselves 
being forced outward 
so think that if the string 
breaks, the mass will 
move in this direction. 
Applying Newton's 
laws. we know that this 
is not the case. This is 
an exam pie of a case 
where intuition gives 
the wrong answer. 
A.2 Figure 51 A mass 
swung in a horizontal circle. 
53 

=== PAGE 100 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
A.2 Figure 52 A mass 
swung in a vertical circle. 
... 
Wall of death. 
A.2 Figure 53 The wall of 
death with a ball rather than 
bike. 
54 
► 
Mass on a string on the Earth (vertical) 
As a mass moves in a vertical circle, the force of gravity sometimes acts in the same 
direction as its motion and sometimes against it. For this reason, it is not possible to 
keep it moving at a constant speed, so here we will just consider it when it is at the top 
and the bottom of the circle as shown in Figure 52. 
mv 2 
mv 2 
At the top, the centripetal force - ,.-' = F, (top)+ mg so F t (top) = ~ 
- mg 
mvb2 
mvb2 
At the bottom, -- = F, (bottom) - mg so F, (bottom) = -- + mg 
r 
r 
When the mass approaches the top of the circle, its kinetic energy is transferred to 
potential energy, resulting in a loss of speed. Ifit were to stop at the top, then it would 
fall straight down. The minimum speed necessary for a complete circle is when the 
weight of the ball is enough to provide the centripetal force without any tension. So if 
mv 2 
F, (topl = 0, then - ' = mg. 
r 
When you rotate a mass in a vertical circle, you definitely feel the change in the tension 
as it decreases toward the top and increases toward the bottom. 
The wall of death 
In the wall of death, motorbikes and cars travel around the inside of a cylinder with 
vertical walls . 
In the wall of death shown in Figure 53, the centripetal force is provided by the normal 
reaction, FN. The weight is balanced by the friction between the ball and wall, which is 
dependent on the normal reaction Fr= 1--1FN. If the velocity is too slow, the normal force 
will be small, which means the friction will not be large enough to support the weight. 

=== PAGE 101 ===
Car on a circular track 
\1/hen a car travels around a circular track, the centripetal force is provided by the 
friction between the tires and the road. The faster you go, the more friction you 
need. The problem is that friction has a maximum value given by Fr= 1-tFN, so if the 
centripetal force required is greater than this, the car will not be able to maintain a 
circular path. W ithout friction, for example, on an icy road, the car would travel in a 
straight line. This means that you would hit the curb on the outside of the circle, giving 
the impression that you have been thrown outward. This is of course not the case since 
there is no force acting outward. 
Cyclist on a banked track 
A banked track is a track that is 
angled to make it possible to go 
faster around the bends. These are 
used in indoor cycle racing. In the 
case shown in Figure 55, where the 
bike is represented by a ball, the 
centripetal force is provided by the 
horizontal component of the normal 
reaction force, so even without 
friction, the ball can travel around 
the track. If the track was angled 
the other way, then it would have 
the opposite effect. This is called an 
adverse camber and bends like this 
should be taken slowly. 
► 
Dynamic friction is 
less than static friction 
so once a car starts to 
skid on a corner it will 
continue. This is also 
why it is not a good 
idea to spin the wheels 
of a car while going 
round a corner. 
A.2 Figure 54 A car 
rounding a bend. 
A racing cyclist on a banked 
track in a velodrome. 
Remember when 
solving circular motion 
pro blems, centripetal 
force is not an extra 
force - it is one of the 
existing forces. Your 
task is to find which 
force (or a component 
of it) points toward the 
center. 
A.2 Figure 55 A ball on a 
banked track. 
55 

=== PAGE 102 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
56 
Exercise 
QI 9. Calculate the centripetal force for a 1000 kg car traveling around a circular 
track of radius 50 mat 30 km h-1• 
Q20. A 200g ball is made to travel in a circle of radius 1 m on the end of a string. 
If the maximum force that the string can withstand before breaking is 50N, 
what is the maximum speed of the ball? 
Q21. A rollercoaster is designed with a 5 m radius vertical loop. Calculate the 
minimum speed necessary to get around the loop without falling down. 
Q22. A 200 g ball moves in a vertical circle on the end of a 50 cm long string. If its 
speed at the bottom is lOms-1, calculate: 
(a) the velocity at the top of the circle 
(b) the tension at the top of the circle. 
Challenge yourself 
1. A car of mass 1000 kg is driving around a circular track with radius 50 m. If the 
coefficient of friction between the tires and road is 0.8, calculate the maximum 
speed of the car before it starts to slip. What would the maximum speed be if the 
track was banked at 45°? 
Guiding Questions revisited 
How can we use our knowledge and understanding of the forces acting on a 
system to predict changes in translational motion? 
How can Newton's laws be modeled mathematically? 
How can the conservation of momentum be used to predict the behavior of 
interacting objects? 
In this chapter, we have considered new quantities and accepted laws to describe how: 
• Different types of force can be distinguished from one another. 
• Forces are vector quantities that can be represented by arrows of appropriate 
length and direction on free-body diagrams (in which the forces acting on, 
rather than exerted by, a given body are shown). 
• Newton's first law states that an object will remain at constant velocity unless 
acted upon by a resultant force. 
• Newton's second law states that the rate of change of momentum is 
proportional to and in the same direction as the resultant force. 
• A resultant force acting at an angle to a body's velocity leads to a change in 
direction and, when the force and velocity are perpendicular, circular motion. 
• Linear acceleration and centripetal acceleration are both defined as the rate of 
change of velocity, but are calculated using different equations. 
• Newton's third law states that when body A exerts a force on body B, body B 
exerts an equal and opposite force (of the same type) on body A. 

=== PAGE 103 ===
• Momentum, the product of mass and velocity, is conserved in the absence of 
external forces, which means that the initial momentum and final momentum 
of a system can be equated. 
• When objects interact, they exert forces on one another, which means that 
momentum is exchanged between them. 
• Newton's second law can be rephrased mathematically as impulse, the product 
of force acting and the time of the interaction, which is equal to change in 
momentum. 
Practice questions 
1. (a) A car goes round a curve in a road at constant speed. Explain why, 
although its speed is constant, it is accelerating. 
(2) 
In the diagram, a marble (small glass sphere) rolls down a track, the bottom 
part of which has been bent into a loop. The end A of the track, from which 
the marble is released, is at a height of 0.80 m above the ground. Point Bis 
the lowest point and point C the highest point of the loop. The diameter of 
the loop is 0.35 m. 
C 
0.80111 
----------T 
0.35m 
ground 
B 
The mass of the marble is 0.050 kg. Friction forces and any gain in kinetic 
energy due to the rotating of the marble can be ignored. The acceleration 
due to gravity, g = 10 m s-2• 
Consider the marble when it is at point C. 
(b) (i) Copy the diagram and on the diagram, draw an arrow to show 
the direction of the resultant force acting on the marble. 
(1) 
(ii) State the names of the two forces acting on the marble. 
(2) 
(iii) Deduce that the speed of the marble is 3.0 m s-1• 
(3) 
(iv) Determine the resultant force acting on the marble and hence 
determine the reaction force of the track on the marble. 
(4) 
(Total 12 marks) 
57 

=== PAGE 104 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
58 
2. 
(a) Define what is meant by coefficient of friction. 
The diagram shows a particular ride at a funfair (sometimes called 
'the fly') that involves a spinning circular room. When it is spinning 
fast enough, a person in the room feels 'stuck' to the wall. The floor is 
lowered and they remain held in place on the wall. Friction prevents 
the person from falling. 
radius = 6.0 m 
(b) (i) Explain whether the friction acting on the person is static, 
dynamic, or a combination of both. 
(2) 
The diagram below shows a cross section of the ride when the floor has 
been lowered. 
(ii) Copy the diagram and, on your diagram, draw labeled arrows to 
represent the forces acting on the person. 
(3) 
(c) Use the data given below: 
mass of person = 80 kg 
coefficient of friction between the person and the wall= 0.40 
radius of circular room = 6.0 m 
Calculate each of the following: 
(i) the magnitude of the minimum resultant horizontal force on 
~~~ 
m 
(ii) the minimum speed of the wall for a person to be 'stuck' to it. 
(2) 
(rota! 10 marks) 

=== PAGE 105 ===
3. 
A 10 000 kg cubic rock (a boulder) rests on the side of a mountain as shown 
in the diagram below. 
(a) Calculate the frictional force acting on the rock. 
(3) 
(b) After a prolonged period of rain, the rock starts to slide down the 
slope. Show that this will happen when the coefficient of friction 
between the rock and the slope is equal to 0.33. 
(3) 
(c) Once the block starts to slide, the coefficient of friction is reduced to 
0.2. Calculate: 
(i) the acceleration of the rock 
(2) 
(ii) the speed of the rock when it reaches the bottom of the hill. 
(2) 
(d) The rock then slides along the flat section of ground. Assuming there 
is no change in the coefficient of friction calculate: 
(i) the frictional force on the rock 
(ii) the distance traveled by the rock. 
(1) 
(2) 
(Total I 3 marks) 
4. 
A student investigates the forces involved in holding a climbing rope by 
standing on bathroom scales while holding a rope as shown in the diagram. 
(a) If both students have mass 60 kg, calculate: 
(i) the tension in the rope 
(1) 
(ii) the reading on the scales 
(2) 
(iii) the friction between the rope holder's feet and the scales. 
(2) 
(b) Explain why the rope-holding student should lower the hanging 
student smoothly. 
(2) 
(Total 7 marks) 
59 

=== PAGE 106 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
sand 
... -------- 4- --------
........ --------------------
60 
5. 
Sand flows out of a container at a rate of 5 kg s-1 and falls a vertical distance 
of 1 m, where it is deflected into the back of a truck by a deflector placed at 
an angle of 45°. 
(a) Calculate: 
(i) the velocity of the sand as it hits the deflector 
(1) 
(ii) the horizontal velocity of the sand after hitting the deflector 
(1) 
(iii) the force exerted by the sand on the deflector. 
(3) 
(b) The sand stops when it hits the back of the truck. 
(i) Explain why there must be a frictional force between the tires 
and the road. 
(3) 
(ii) Calculate the force of friction between the truck and the ground. 
(2) 
(rotal 10 marks) 
6. Two forces act on an object in different directions. The magnitudes of 
the forces are 18 N and 27 N. The mass of the object is 9.0 kg. What is 
a possible value for the acceleration of the object? 
A 
0ms-2 
B 
0.5ms-2 
C 
2.0ms-2 
D 
6.0ms-2 
(rotal 1 mark) 
7. 
An object of mass m strikes a vertical wall horizontally at speed U. 
The object rebounds from the wall horizontally at speed V. What is the 
magnitude of the change in the momentum of the object? 
A 
0 
B 
m(V- U) 
C 
m(U - V) 
D 
m(U+ V) 
(rotal 1 mark) 
8. 
A sphere is suspended from the end of a string and rotates in a horizontal 
circle as shown on the left. Which free-body diagram, to the correct scale, 
shows the forces acting on the sphere? 
A 
B 
C 
D 
(rotal 1 mark) 

=== PAGE 107 ===
9. A company delivers packages to customers using a small unmanned 
aircraft. Rotating horizontal blades exert a force on the surrounding air. 
The air above the aircraft is initially stationary. 
The air is propelled vertically downward with speed v. The aircraft hovers 
motionless above the ground. A package is suspended from the aircraft 
on a string. The mass of the aircraft is 0. 9 5 kg and the combined mass of 
the package and string is 0.45 kg. The mass of air pushed downward by the 
blades in one second is 1.7 kg. 
(a) State the value of the resultant force on the aircraft when hovering. 
(b) Outline, by reference to Newton's third law, how the upward lift force 
on the aircraft is achieved. 
(c) Determine v. State your answer to an appropriate number of 
significant figures. 
(d) The package and string are now released and fall to the ground. The 
lift force on the aircraft remains unchanged. Calculate the initial 
acceleration of the aircraft. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(2) 
(Total 8 marks) 
10. The Rotor is an amusement park ride that can be modeled as a vertical 
cylinder of inner radius R rotating about its axis. When the cylinder rotates 
fast enough, the floor drops out and the passengers stay motionless against 
the inner surface of the cylinder. The diagram on the right shows a person 
taking the Rotor ride. The floor of the Rotor has been lowered away from 
the person. 
(a) Draw and label the free-body diagram for the person. 
(b) The person must not slide down the wall. Show that the minimum 
angular velocity of the cylinder for this situation is: 
w=ei 
whereµ is the coefficient of static friction between the person and the 
(2) 
cylinder. 
(2) 
(c) The coefficient of static friction between the person and the cylinder 
is 0.40. The radius of the cylinder is 3.5 m. The cylinder makes 28 
revolutions per minute. Deduce whether the person will slide down 
the inner surface of the cylinder. 
(3) 
(Total 7 marks) 
" r=TV Y:.irc,.r, 
~package 
-=======;-ground 
_.i..- -
61 

=== PAGE 108 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.2 
Forces and momentum 
62 
11. A boulder is many times heavier than a pebble; that is, the gravitational 
force that acts on a boulder is many times that which acts on the pebble. 
If you drop a boulder and a pebble at the same time, they will fall together 
with equal accelerations (neglecting air resistance). The principal reason 
the heavier boulder does not accelerate more than the pebble has to do 
with what? 
A 
Energy 
B 
Weight 
C 
Mass 
D 
Surface area 
E 
none of these 
(Total 1 mark) 
12. The force exerted on a house by a 120 mph hurricane wind is how many 
times as strong as the force exerted on the same house by a 60 mph gale wind? 
A 
Equally 
B 
Two times 
C 
Three times 
D 
Four times 
(Total 1 mark) 
13. Two buckets hang from a rope over a frictionless pulley. The bucket on the 
right has a mass m2, which is greater than the mass of the bucket on the left 
m1• Bucket 2 starts at height h above the ground. If the buckets are released 
from rest, determine: 
(a) the speed with which bucket 2 hits the ground in terms of m1, m2, h, 
and the acceleration due to gravity g 
(2) 
(b) the further increase in height of bucket 1 after bucket 2 hits the ground 
and stops. 
(2) 
Ignore resistive effects and assume the rope is long compared to the height 
above the ground. 
(Total 4 marks) 
