=== PAGE 109 ===
Work, energy and power 

=== PAGE 110 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
64 
• 
0 
◄ 
A Rube Go ldberg machine starts with a small action (like the pressing o f a button o r the knocking 
over of a domino tile) that sets off a chain reaction of different events. which continues for an 
extended time. Objects that are stretched, at a height, o r moving. combine - often with entertaining 
consequences (as seen in films, music videos, advertisements and social media). 
Guiding Questions 
How are concepts of work, energy and power used to predict changes within 
a system? 
How can a consideration of energetics be used as a method to solve problems 
in kinematics? 
How can transfer of energy be used to do work? 
If body A pushes body B, body B may start to move. This movement might cause body 
B to hit body C, after which, body C moves toward body D (you get the idea). The 
'ability to push' seems to be passed on from one object to another. We call this energy, 
and the fact that it is conserved can lead to a simple way of solving problems that 
bypasses all the complications of forces and motion. 
For example, when calculating the final velocity of a box pushed up a slope by a 
constant force, we need to find the component of force up the slope, use that to find 
acceleration, and then apply the suvat equations to calculate final velocity. Or, using 
conservation of energy, we can state that the gain in potential energy and kinetic 
energy is equal to the work done. 
It is the same when we study gases. It is much easier to understand how work done on 
a gas increases its temperature than to model the motion of each molecule. 
Students should understand: 
the principle of the conservation of energy 
work done by a force is equivalent to a transfer of energy 
energy transfers can be represented on a Sankey diagram 
work W done on a body by a constant force depends on the component of the force along the 
line of displacement as given by W = Fs cos 0 
work done by the resultant force on a system is equal to the change in the energy of the system 
mechanical energy is the sum of kinetic energy, gravitational potential energy and elastic 
potential energy 
in the absence of frictional, resistive forces, the total mechanical energy of a system is 
conserved 
if mechanical energy is conserved, work is the amount of energy transformed between 
different forms of mechanical energy in a system, such as: 
. the kinetic energy of translational motion as given by Ek =½ m 112 = ;,:, 
. the gravitational potential energy, when close to the surface of the Earth, as given by: 
t:.EP =mgt:.h 
. the elastic potential energy as given by EH= ½kt:.x2 

=== PAGE 111 ===
power P is the rate of work done, or the rate of energy transfer, as given by P = f = Fv 
E 
p 
ffj 
f 
f, 
'"'P" 
""'I"'' 
e 1Ciency I/ in terms o energy trans er or power as given by 17 = y--- = y-
inpul 
inpul 
energy density of the fuel sources. 
Nature of Science 
Scientists should remain skeptical but that does not mean you have to doubt 
everything you read. The law of conservation of energy is supported by many 
experiments and is the basis of countless predictions that turn out to be true. 
If someone now found that energy was not conserved, there would be a lot 
of explaining to do. Once a law is accepted, it gives us an easy way to make 
predictions. For example, if you are shown a device that produces energy from 
nowhere, you know it must be a fake without even finding out how it works 
because it violates the law of conservation of energy. 
In A. l and A.2, we dealt with the motion of a small red ball and now understand what 
causes acceleration. We have also investigated the interaction between a red ball and 
a blue one and have seen that the red one can cause the blue one to move when they 
collide. But what enables the red one to push the blue one? To answer this question, we 
need to define some more quantities. 
Work 
In the introduction to this book, it was stated that by developing models, our aim is 
to understand the physical world so that we can make predictions. At this point, you 
should understand certain concepts related to the collision between two balls, but we 
still cannot predict the outcome. To illustrate this point, let us again consider the red 
and blue balls. Figure 1 shows three possible outcomes of the collision. 
If we apply the law of conservation of momentum, we realize that all three outcomes 
are possible. The original momentum is 10 N sand the final momentum is 10 N s in all 
three cases. But which one actually happens? This we cannot say (yet). All we know is 
that from experience the last option is not possible - but why? 
When body A hits body B, body A exerts a force on body B. This force causes B to have 
an increase in velocity. The amount that the velocity increases depends on how big the 
force is and over what distance the collision takes place. To make this simpler, consider 
a constant force acting on two blocks as in Figure 2. 
F 
F 
► 
► 
F 
F 
► 
► 
a. 
b. 
IOms-1 
~ 
e 0 
IOOms-1 
l lOms-1 
C. ~ ~ 
0 0 
.. 
A.3 Figure 1 The red ball 
hits the blue ball but what 
happens? 
A.3 Figure 2 The force acts 
on the orange block for a 
greater distance. 
65 

=== PAGE 112 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
How do traveling waves 
allow for a transfer 
of energy without a 
resultant displacement of 
matter? (C2, A. 1) 
66 
Both blocks start at rest and are pulled by the same force, but the orange block will 
gain more velocity because the force acts over a longer distance. To quantify this 
difference, we say that in the case of the orange block, the force has done more work. 
Work is done when the point of application of a force moves in the direction of the 
force. 
Work is defined in the following way: 
work done = force x distance moved in the direction of the force 
The unit of work is the newton meter (Nm), which is the same as the joule Q). 
Work is a scalar quantity. 
Worked example 
A tractor pulls a felled tree along the ground 
for a distance of 200 m. If the tractor exerts a 
force of 5000 N, how much work will be done? 
Solution 
0 
work done= force x distance moved in direction of force 
work done = 5000 x 200 = 1 MJ 
Worked example 
;. 
A force of 10 N is applied 
to a block, pulling it 
50 m along the ground as 
shown. How much work is 
done by the force? 
~ ION 
~
ION 
= 
+-----50m----+ 
Solution 
In this example, the force is not in the same direction as the movement. However, 
the horizontal component of the force is 10 x cos 30°. 
work done= 10 x cos 30° x 50 = 433 N 

=== PAGE 113 ===
Worked example 
When a car brakes, it slows down due to the friction force between the tires 
and the road. This force opposes the motion as shown. If the friction force is a 
constant 500 N and the car comes to rest in 25 m, how much work is done by the 
friction force? 
500N 
Solution 
500N 
-------25m--------+ 
This time, the force is in the opposite direction to the motion. 
work done = - 500 x 25 = - 12 500 J 
The negative sign tells us that the car's kinetic energy is decreasing. The internal energy 
of the brake disks has increased; positive work has been done on them by friction. 
Worked example 
The woman in the figure walks along with a constant 
velocity holding a suitcase. 
How much work is done by the force holding the case? 
Solution 
In this example, the force is acting perpendicular to the direction of motion, so 
there is no movement in the direction of the force. 
General formula 
In general: 
work done = zero 
work = F cos e X l'!.s 
where e is the angle between the displacement, l'!.s, and force, F3. 
----- ~s --------+-
It may seem strange 
that when you carry a 
heavy bag you are not 
doing any work - that 
is not what it feels like. 
In reality. lots of work 
is being done, since to 
hold the bag you use 
your muscles. Muscles 
are made of microscopic 
fibers, which are 
continuously contracting 
and relaxing, so are 
doing work. 
67 

=== PAGE 114 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
force 
F+------, 
+--tu --+ 
distance 
• 
A.3 Figure 3 Force vs 
distance for a constant force. 
force 
extension 
• 
A.3 Figure 4 Force vs 
extension for a spring. 
68 
All the previous examples can be solved using this formula. 
If 0 < 90°, cos 0 is positive so the work is positive. 
If fJ"' 90°, cos fJ"' 0 so the work is zero. 
If 0 > 90°, cos 0 is negative so the work is negative. 
Exercise 
QI. The figure shows a boy taking a dog for a walk. 
(a) Calculate the work done by the force shown when the dog moves 
lOmforward. 
(b) Who is doing the work? 
Q2. A bird weighing 200 g sits on a tree branch. How much work does the bird do 
on the tree? 
Q3. As a box slides along the floor, it is slowed down by a constant force due to 
friction. If this force is 150 N and the box slides for 2 m, how much work is 
done against the frictional force? 
Graphical method for determining work done 
Let us consider a constant force acting in the direction of movement pulling a body 
a distance 1::,,.x. The graph of force against distance for this example is as shown in 
Figure 3. From the definition of work, we know that work done= Fllx, which in this 
case is the area under the graph. From this we can deduce that: 
work done = area under force vs distance graph 
Work done by a varying force 
Stretching a spring is a common example of a varying force. When you stretch a 
spring, it gets more and more difficult the longer it gets. Within certain limits, the force 
needed to stretch the spring is directly proportional to the extension of the spring: 
FH = kx. This was first recognized by Robert Hooke in 1676, so is named Hooke's law. 
If we add different weights to a spring, the more weight we add, the longer it gets. If we 
draw a graph of force against distance as we stretch a spring, it will look like the graph 
F 
in Figure 4. The gradient of this line, 8: is called the spring constant, k. 
The work done as the spring is stretched is found by calculating the area under the 
graph: 
area = 2. base x height = 2. FH.llx 
2 
2 
So: 
I 
work done= 2 FH~x 
But if: 

=== PAGE 115 ===
Substituting for FH gives: 
I 
work done = 2 ktix2 
This is equal to the elastic potential energy, EH 
Exercise 
Q4. A spring of spring constant 2 N cm-1 and length 6 cm is stretched to a new 
length of 8 cm. 
(a) How far has the spring been stretched? 
(b) What force will be needed to hold the spring at this length? 
(c) Sketch a graph of force against extension for this spring. 
(d) Calculate the work done in stretching the spring. 
(e) The spring is now stretched a further 2 cm. Draw a line on your graph to 
represent this and calculate how much additional work has been done. 
Q5. Calculate the work done by the force represented by the figure on the right. 
Energy 
We have seen that it is sometimes possible for body A to do work on body B, but what 
does A have that enables it to do work on B? To answer this question, we must define a 
new quantity: energy. 
Energy is the quantity that enables body A to do work on body B. 
If body A collides with body Bas shown in Figure 5, body A has done work on body B. 
This means that body B can now do work on body C. Energy has been transferred from 
A toB. 
When body A does work on body B, ene,:gy is transferred from body A to body B. 
The unit of energy is the joule 0)- Energy is a scalar quantity. 
Different types of energy 
If a body can do work, then it has energy. There are two ways that a simple body such 
as a red ball can do work. In the example above, body A could do work because it 
was moving - this is called kinetic energy. Figure 6 shows an example where A can 
do work even though it is not moving. In this example, body A is able to do work on 
body B because of its position above the Earth. If the hand is removed, body A will be 
pulled downward by the force of gravity, and the string attached to it will then drag 
body B along the table. If a body is able to do work because of its position, we say it has 
potential energy. 
5 
10 
distance (m) 
V 
~ 
0 0 
© 
before A hits B 
V 
~ 
0 0 0 
after A hits B 
A 
A.3 Figure 5 The red ball 
gives energy to the blue ball. 
B 
A 
A.3 Figure 6 A has 
potential energy that could 
become kinetic energy. 
69 

=== PAGE 116 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
If we say a body has 
potential energy, it 
sounds as though it 
has the potential to do 
work. This is true, but 
a body that is moving 
has the potential to do 
work too. This can lead 
to misunderstanding. It 
might have been better 
to call it positional 
energy 
A.3 Figure 7 A ball gains 
kinetic energy. 
In this section. we only 
deal with examples of 
potential energy due to 
a body's position close 
to the Earth. However, 
there are other positions 
that will enable a body 
to do work (for example, 
in an electric field). 
These will be introduced 
after the concept 
of fields has been 
introduced. 
Why is the equation 
for the change in 
gravitational potential 
energy only relevant 
close to the surface of 
the Earth, and what 
happens when moving 
further away from the 
surface? (D.1} 
How is Kirchhoff's law 
a consequence of the 
law of conservation of 
energy? (B.5} 
70 
Kinetic energy (EJ 
This is the energy a body has due to its movement. To give a body kinetic energy, work 
must be done on the body. The amount of work done will be equal to the increase in 
kinetic energy. If a constant force acts on a red ball of mass mas shown in Figure 7, 
then the work done is Fs. 
V 
time= 0 
time=! 
From Newton's second law, we know that F = ma, which we can substitute in work = Fs 
to give work = mas. 
We also know that since acceleration is constant, we can use the suvat equation 
v2 = u2 + 2as, which since u = 0 simplifies to v2 = 2as. 
v2 
1 
Rearranging this gives: as = 2 so work = 2 mv2 
This work has increased the kinetic energy of the body so we can deduce that: 
E 
1 
2 
k = 2mv 
Gravitational potential energy (Ep) 
This is the energy a body has due to its position above the Earth. 
For a body to have potential energy, it must have at some time been lifted to that 
position. The amount of work done in lifting it equals the potential energy. Taking the 
example shown in Figure 9, the work done in lifting the mass, m, to a height his mgh 
(this assumes that the body is moving at a constant velocity so the lifting force and 
weight are balanced). 
If work is done on the body then energy is transferred so: 
gain in EP = mgh 
The law of conservation of energy 
We could not have derived the equations for kinetic energy or potential energy without 
assuming that the work done is the same as the gain in energy. The law of conservation 
of energy is a formal statement of this fact. 
Energy can neither be created nor destroyed; it can on!Y be transferred from one store to another. 
This law is one of the most important laws that we use in physics. If it were not true, 
you could suddenly find yourself at the top of the stairs without having done any work 
in climbing them, or a car suddenly has a speed of 200 km h- 1 without anyone touching 
the accelerator pedal. These things just do not happen, so the laws we use to describe 
the physical world should reflect that. 

=== PAGE 117 ===
Looping the loop 
\1/hen looping the loop on a rollercoaster, the situation is very similar to the vertical 
circle example, except that the tension is replaced by the normal reaction force. This 
also gives a minimum speed at the top of the loop when m;,' = F8• 
h 
~ 
A.3 Figure 8 Looping the loop. 
Applying the law of conservation of energy to the car in Figure 8, if no energy is lost, 
then the EP at the top of the hill = EP + Ek at the top of the loop. 
The minimum speed to complete the loop is mg= ~~
2 so at the top of the loop: 
1 
1 
2mv2 = 2mgr 
The height of the car at the top of the loop is 2r so Er = mgh = mg2r. 
So Er at top of slope = 2mgr + imgr = 2.5mgr, which means the height of the slope = 2.5r. 
In any real situation, there will be energy lost due to work done against friction and air 
resistance so the slope will have to be a bit higher. 
Worked example 
A ball of mass 200 g is thrown vertically upward with a 
velocity of 2 m s-1 as shown in the figure. Use the law of 
conservation of energy to calculate its maximum height. 
Solution 
i 
2ms- 1 
At the start of its motion, the body has kinetic energy. This enables the body to do 
work against gravity as the ball travels upward. When the ball reaches the top, all 
the kinetic energy has been transferred to potential energy. So applying the law of 
conservation of energy: 
So: 
loss of Ek = gain in Er 
1 
2 mv2 = mgh 
v2 
22 
h = 2g = 2 x 10 = 0.2m 
This is exactly the same answer you would get by calculating the acceleration from 
F = ma and using the suvat equations. 
~ 
If the ride is propelled by 
gravity, then the designer 
must make sure that the car 
has this minimum speed 
when it reaches the top 
71 

=== PAGE 118 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
In this example, the 
spring is compressed 
not stretched, but 
Hooke's law still 
applies 
72 
Worked example 
A block slides down the frictionless 
ramp shown in the figure. Use the law of 
conservation of energy to find its speed when 
it gets to the bottom. 
Solution 
This time the body loses potential energy and gains kinetic energy so applying the 
law of conservation of energy: 
loss of EP = gain of Ek 
I 
mgh = 2mv2 
So: 
v = J2gh = J(2 x 10 x 5) = lOms- 1 
Again, this is a much simpler way of getting the answer than using components of 
the forces. 
Exercise 
Use the law of conservation of energy to solve the following: 
Q6. A stone of mass 500 g is thrown off the top of a cliff with a speed of 5 m s- 1• If 
the cliff is 50 m high, what is its speed just before it hits the ground? 
Q7. A ball of mass 250g is dropped 5 m onto a spring 
as shown in the figure on the right. 
(a) How much kinetic energy will the ball have 
when it hits the spring? 
(b) How much work will be done as the spring is 
compressed? 
(c) If the spring constant is 250 kN m- 1, calculate 
how far the spring will be compressed. 
0 
Q8. A ball of mass 100g is hit vertically upward with a bat. The bat exerts a 
constant force of 15 Non the ball and is in contact with it for a distance of 5 cm. 
(a) How much work does the bat do on the ball? 
(b) How high will the ball go? 
Q9. A child pushes a toy car of mass 200 g up a slope. The car has a speed of 
2 m s- 1 at the bottom of the slope. 
(a) How high up the slope will the car go? 
(b) If the speed of the car were doubled, how high would it go now? 

=== PAGE 119 ===
Stores of energy 
When we are describing the motion of simple red balls, there are only two stores of 
energy, kinetic energy and potential energy. However, when we start to look at more 
complicated systems, we discover that we can do work using a variety of different 
machines, such as petrol engine, electric engine, etc. To do work, these machines must 
be given energy and this can come from many stores, for example: 
• petrol 
• solar 
• gas 
• nuclear 
• electricity 
All of these (except solar) are related to either the kinetic energy or potential energy 
of particles. 
Fuels 
A petrol car gets its energy from petrol, which is mixed with air in the engine and 
ignited by a spark, causing it to explode. The explosion pushes up a piston that turns 
a crank, which converts the linear motion of the piston into rotation of the wheels. 
Petrol is an example of a fuel - a chemical that can be burned to produce heat, which 
can be used to enable an engine to do work. 
Different fuels contain different amounts of energy. Physicists compare the energy 
contents of fuels in terms of the energy per unit volume (energy density). 
Fuel 
Energy density/MJ L - 1 
Coal 
72 
Crude oil 
37 
Diesel 
36 
Sugar 
26 
Vegetable oil 
30 
Wood 
3 
A.3 Table 1 
During the process of burning and moving parts of the engine, some energy is lost. 
The flow of energy can be represented on a Sankey diagram. The width of an arrow 
represents the amount of that type of energy and, because the total width of all output 
arrows is equal to the input width, conservation of energy is displayed. 
energy to customers 
energy used in power station 
Where do the laws of 
conservation apply in 
other areas of physics? 
(NOS) 
How is the equilibrium 
state of a system, such as 
the Earth's atmosphere 
or a star. determined? 
(B2. E.5} 
A.3 Figure 9 A Sankey 
diagram for a coal-fired 
power station. 
73 

=== PAGE 120 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
... 
A.3 Figure 1 O The forces 
acting on a car traveling at 
constant velocity 
a 
... 
A.3 Figure 11 The forces 
on a car traveling at high 
speed with the foot off the 
accelerator pedal. 
If you go over a hump 
back bridge too 
quickly. your car might 
leave the surface of the 
road. This is because 
the force needed to 
keep you moving in a 
circle is more than the 
weight of the car 
74 
Energy transfer 
Taking the example of a petrol engine, the energy stored in the petrol is transferred to 
mechanical energy of the car by the engine. I liter of petrol contains 36 MJ of energy. 
Let us calculate how far a car could travel at a constant 36 km 11-1 on I liter of fuel; that 
is pretty slow but 36 km h-1 is 10 m s-1 so it will make the calculation easier. 
The reason a car needs to use energy when traveling at a constant speed is because 
of air resistance. If we look at the forces acting on the car, we see that there must be a 
constant forward force (provided by the friction between tires and road} to balance the 
air resistance or drag force. 
So work is done against the drag force, and the energy to do this work comes from the 
petrol. The amount of work done = force x distance traveled. So to calculate the work 
done, we need to know the drag force on a car traveling at 36 km h-1• One way to do 
this would be to drive along a flat road at a constant 36 km h-1 and then take your foot 
off the accelerator pedal. The car would then slow down because of the unbalanced 
drag force. 
This force will get less as the car slows down but here we will assume it is constant. 
From Newton's second law, we know that F = ma, so if we can measure how fast the 
car slows down, we can calculate the force. This will depend on the make of car but to 
reduce the speed by 1 m s-1 (about 4 km h- 1) would take about 2s. Now we can do the 
calculation: 
. 
(v - u) 
(9 - 10) 
acceleration of car = -
t-. - = --2-
= -0.5 m s-2 
drag force= ma = 1000 x - 0.5 = - 500N 
So to keep the car moving at a constant velocity, this force would need to be balanced 
by an equal and opposite force, F = 500 N. 
work done 
Work done = force x distance so the distance traveled by the car = 
f, orce 
So if all of the energy in I liter of fuel is converted to work, the car will move a 
36 X 106 
distance = 500 = 72 km. Note that if you reduce the drag force on the car, you 
increase the distance it can travel on I liter of fuel. 
Circular motion and work 
In the previous chapter (A.2}, we learned that for an object to move in a circle, a 
centripetal force (resultant force perpendicular to velocity) was required. An alternative 
way of deducing that the force acts toward the center is to consider the energy. When 
a body moves in a circle with constant speed, it will have constant kinetic energy. This 
means that no work is being done on the mass. But we also know that since the velocity 
is changing, there must be a force acting on the body. This force cannot be acting in the 
direction of motion, since if it was, then work would be done and the kinetic energy 
would increase. We can therefore deduce that the force must be perpendicular to the 
direction of motion; in other words, toward the center of the circle. 

=== PAGE 121 ===
Efficiency 
A very efficient road car driven carefully would not be able to drive much further 
than 20 km on l liter of fuel so energy must be lost somewhere. One place where the 
energy is lost is in doing work against the friction that exists between the moving parts 
of the engine. Using oil and grease will reduce this but it can never be eliminated. The 
efficiency of an engine is defined by the equation: 
ff . 
useful work out 
e tCiency = total energy in 
So if a car travels 20 km at a speed of 10 m s-1, the useful work done by the engine: 
= force x distance = 500 x 20000 = 10 MJ 
10 
The total energy put in = 36 MJ so the efficiency = 36 = 0.28. 
Efficiency is of ten expressed as a percentage so this would be 28%. 
Where does all the energy go? 
In this example, we calculated the energy required to move a car along a flat road. The 
car was traveling at a constant speed so there was no increase in kinetic energy and the 
road was flat so there was no increase in potential energy. We know that energy cannot 
be created or destroyed so where has the energy gone? The answer is that it has been 
transferred to the particles that make up the air and car. 
Exercise 
Q 10. A 45% efficient machine lifts 100 kg through 2 m. 
(a) How much work is done by the machine? 
(b) How much energy is used by the machine? 
QI I. A 1000kg car accelerates uniformly from rest to 100km h-1• 
(a) Ignoring air resistance and friction, calculate how much work was done 
by the car's engine. 
(b) If the car is 60% efficient, how much energy in the form of fuel was given 
to the engine? 
(c) If the fuel contains 36 MJ per liter, how many liters of fuel were used? 
Energy and collisions 
One of the reasons that we brought up the concept of energy was related to the 
collision between two balls as shown in Figure 12. We now know that if no energy is 
lost when the balls collide, then the kinetic energy before the collision = kinetic energy 
after. This enables us to calculate the velocity afterwards and the only solution in this 
example is quite a simple one. The red ball transfers all its kinetic energy to the blue 
one, so the red one stops and the blue one continues, with velocity = 10 m s- 1• If the 
balls become squashed, then some work needs to be done to squash them. In this case, 
not all the kinetic energy is transferred, and we can only calculate the outcome if we 
know how much energy is used in squashing the balls. 
• 
There has been a lot of 
research into making 
cars more efficient so 
that they use less fuel. 
Is this to save energy or 
money? 
!Oms- 1 
~ 
0 0 
A.3 Figure 12 The red ball 
gives energy to the blue ball. 
75 

=== PAGE 122 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
A.3 Figure 13 Collision 
► 
between two identical balls. 
A.3 Figure 14 A possible 
elastic collision. 
76 
Elastic collisions 
An elastic collision is a collision in which both momentum and kinetic energy 
are conserved. 
Example: two balls with equal mass 
Two balls with equal mass m collide as shown in Figure 13. As you can see, the red ball 
is traveling faster than the blue one before and slower after. If the collision is perfectly 
elastic, then we can show that the velocities of the balls simply swap so u1 = v2 and 
U2 = v,. 
u, 
0 
0 
before 
after 
If the collision is elastic, then momentum and kinetic energy are both conserved. If we 
consider these one at a time we get: 
Conservation of momentum: 
momentum before = momentum after 
Conservation of kinetic energy: 
Ek before = Ek after 
So we can see that the velocities are such that both their sums are equal and the squares 
of their sums are equal. This is only true if the velocities swap, as in Figure 14. 
Sms- 1 
4ms- 1 
4ms-1 
Sms-1 
) 
) 
) 
Q 
Q 
Q 
Q 
before 
after 
Collision in two-dimensions between two identical balls 
Anyone who has ever played pool or snooker will know that balls do not always collide 
in line; they travel at angles to each other. Figure 15 shows a possible collision. 

=== PAGE 123 ===
u 
0 
before 
In this case, the blue ball is stationary so applying the conservation laws we get slightly 
simpler equations: 
Note the vector notation to remind us that we are dealing with vectors. The first 
equation means that the sum of the velocity vectors after the collision gives the 
velocity before. This can be represented by the triangle of vectors in Figure 16. 
The second equation tells us that the sum of the squares of two sides of this triangle = the 
square of the other side. This is Pythagoras' theorem, which is only true for right-angled 
triangles. So after an elastic collision between two identical balls, the two balls will 
always travel away at right angles (unless the collision is perfectly head-on). This of 
course does not apply to balls rolling on a pool table since they are not isolated. 
Inelastic collisions 
There are many outcomes of an inelastic collision but here we will only consider the 
case when the two bodies stick together (coalesce). We call this a totally inelastic 
collision. 
Example 
When considering the conservation of momentum in collisions, we used the example 
shown in Figure 17. How much work was done to squash the balls in this example? 
before 
after 
According to the law of conservation of energy, the work done squashing the balls is 
equal to the loss in kinetic energy. 
Ek loss = 1.8-0.3 = 1.5 J 
So: 
work done = 1.5 J 
◄ A.3 Figure 15 A two-
dimensional collision. 
• 
A.3 Figure 16 Adding the 
velocity vectors. 
Pool balls may not 
collide like perfectly 
elastic isolated spheres 
but. if the table is 
included, their motion 
can be accurately 
modeled. enabling 
scientists to calculate 
the correct direction 
and speed for the 
perfect shot. Taking 
that shot is another 
matter entirely. 
W hy is the internal 
energy of an ideal gas 
equal to the sum of the 
kinetic energies but not 
the potential energies? 
(B.3) 
A.3 Figure 17 An inelastic 
collision. 
How do collisions 
between charge carriers 
and the atomic cores 
of a conductor result in 
thermal energy transfer? 
(BS. B.l) 
77 

=== PAGE 124 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
A.3 Figure 18 An explosion. ► 
The result of this 
example is very 
important; we 
will use it when 
dealing with nuclear 
decay later on. So 
remember, when a 
body explodes into 
two unequal bits, 
the small bit gets 
most energy. 
!Oms- 1 
~ 
ISms- 1 
~ (ii 
78 
Explosions 
Explosions can never be elastic since, without doing work, the parts that fly off after 
the explosion would not have any kinetic energy and would therefore not be moving. 
The energy to initiate an explosion often comes from the chemical energy contained in 
the explosive. 
Example 
Consider an exploding ball (shown in Figure 18). How much energy was supplied to 
the ball by the explosive? 
5ms-• 
20g 
before 
after 
According to the law of conservation of energy, the energy from the explosive equals 
the gain in kinetic energy of the ball. 
Ek gain = Ek after - Ek before 
Ek gain = (½x 0.02 x 252 +{x 0.1 x 52)-o = 6.25 + 1.25 = 7.5] 
Exercise 
Ql2. Two balls are held together by a spring as shown 
in the figure. The spring has a spring constant of 
l ON cm-1 and has been compressed a distance 5 cm. 
(a) How much work was done to compress the spring? 
(b) How much kinetic energy will each gain? 
(c) If each ball has a mass of 10g, calculate the velocity of each ball. 
QI 3. Two pieces of modeling clay as shown in the figure collide and stick together. 
(a) Calculate the velocity of the lump after the collision. 
(b) How much kinetic energy is lost during the collision? 
Ql4. A red ball traveling at 10ms- 1 to the right collides with a blue ball with the 
same mass traveling at 15 m s-1 to the left. If the collision is elastic, what are 
the velocities of the balls after the collision? 
Challenge yourself 
I. A 200g red ball traveling at 6 m s-1 collides with a 500g blue ball at rest, such 
that after the collision the red ball travels at 4 m s-• at an angle of 45° to its 
original direction. Calculate the speed of the blue ball. 

=== PAGE 125 ===
Power 
We know that to do work requires energy, but work can be done quickly or it can be 
done slowly. This does not alter the energy transferred but the situations are certainly 
different. For example, we know that to lift one thousand 1 kg bags of sugar from the 
floor to the table is not an impossible task - we can simply lift them one by one. It will 
take a long time but we would manage it in the end. However, if we were asked to do 
the same task in 5 seconds, we would either have to lift all 1000 kg at the same time 
or move each bag in 0.005 s; both of which are impossible. Power is the quantity that 
distinguishes between these two tasks. 
Power is defined as: 
power = work done per unit time 
The unit of power is the J s- 1 which is the same as the watt (W). Power is a scalar quantity. 
Example 1: The powerful car 
We often use the term power to describe cars. A powerful car is one that can accelerate 
from Oto 100 km h- 1 in a very short time. When a car accelerates, energy is being 
transferred from the chemical energy in the fuel to kinetic energy. To have a big 
acceleration, the car must gain kinetic energy in a short time; hence be powerful. 
Example 2: Power lifter 
A power lifter is someone who can lift heavy weights, so should we not say they are 
strong people rather than powerful? A power lifter certainly is a strong person (if they 
are good at it) but they are also powerful. This is because they can lift a big weight in a 
short time. 
Worked example 
A car of mass 1000 kg accelerates from rest to 100 km h-1 in 5 seconds. What is the 
average power of the car? 
Solution 
lOOkmh- 1 = 28ms-1 
gain in kinetic energy of the car = ½ mv2 = ½ x 1000 x 282 = 392 kJ 
If the car does this in 5 s, then: 
work done 
392 
power= 
. 
= -
=78.4kW 
time 
5 
If power=~ 
time 
then we can also 
write 
p = F~s 
So 
P= F¥ 
which is the same as 
P= Fv 
where v is the 
velocity. 
This equation is a 
useful shortcut for 
calculating the power 
of a body moving at 
constant velocity. 
Which other quantities 
in physics involve rates 
of change? (e.g. A. l , BS, 
Cl, E3) 
Horsepower is often 
used as the unit for 
power when talking 
about cars and boats. 
746W = 1 hp 
So in the Worked 
example, the power of 
the car is 105 hp. 
79 

=== PAGE 126 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
The Hoover Dam in 
► 
Colorado can generate 
l. 5 x 109 watts. 
A.3 Figure 19 The 
main components in a 
hydroelectric power station. 
80 
Example 3: Hydroelectric power 
It may not be obvious at first, but the energy converted into electrical energy by 
hydroelectric power stations comes originally from the Sun. Heat from the Sun turns 
water into water vapor, forming clouds. The clouds are blown over the land and the water 
vapor turns back into water as rain falls. Rain water falling on high ground has potential 
energy that can be converted into electricity (see Figure 20). Some countries like Norway 
have many natural lakes high in the mountains and the energy can be utilized by simply 
drilling into the bottom of the lake. In other countries rivers have to be dammed. 
The energy stored in a lake at altitude is gravitational potential energy. This can be 
calculated from the equation EP = mgh where his the height difference between the outlet 
from the lake and the turbine. Since not all of the water in the lake is the same height, the 
average height is used (this is assuming the lake is rectangular in cross section). 
power lines 

=== PAGE 127 ===
Worked example 
Calculate the total energy stored and 
power generated in the figure if water 
flows from the lake at a rate of 
11113 per second. 
Solution 
The average height above the turbine is 
(100 + 75) 
2 
= 87.5111 
Volume of the lake= 2000 x 1000 x 25 = 5 x 107 1113 
Mass of the lake= volume x density= 5 x 107 x 1000 
= 5 X 1010kg 
EP = mgh = 5 x 1010 x 9.8 x 87.5 = 4.29 x 1013 J 
If the water flows at a rate of 1 1113 per second then 1000 kg falls 87.5 m per second 
So the energy lost by the water= 1000 x 9.8 x 87.5 = 875 0OOJ s-1 
Power= 875 kW 
Exercise 
Q15. A weightlifter lifts 200 kg to a height of 2 min 5 s. Calculate the power of the 
weightlifter in watts. 
Q16. In 25 s, a trolley of mass 50 kg runs down a hill. If the difference in height 
between the top and the bottom of the hill is 50 m, how much power will 
have been dissipated? 
QI 7. A car moves along a road at a constant velocity of20ms-1• If the resistance force 
acting against the car is l 000 N, what is the power developed by the engine? 
Efficiency and power 
Efficiency is a quantity that gives a sense of the proportion of input energy that is 
transferred to useful stores. We define efficiency, 17, by the equation: 
ff . 
useful work out 
e ICJency = total work in 
If the work out is done at the same time as the work in, then we can divide the 
numerator and the denominator by time to give the equivalent equation: 
useful power out 
efficiency=-------
total power in 
81 

=== PAGE 128 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
82 
Exercise 
Ql8. A motor is used to lift a 10 kg mass 2 m above the ground in 4s. If the power 
input to the motor is 100 W, what is the efficiency of the motor? 
QI 9. A motor is 70% efficient. If 60 kJ of energy is put into the engine, how much 
work is got out? 
Q20. The drag force that resists the motion of a car traveling at 80 km h- 1 is 300 N. 
(a) What power is reg uired to keep the car traveling at that speed? 
(b) If the efficiency of the engine is 60%, what is the power of the engine? 
Guiding Questions revisited 
How are concepts of work, energy and power used to predict changes within 
a system? 
How can a consideration of energetics be used as a method to solve problems 
in kinematics? 
How can transfer of energy be used to do work? 
In this chapter, we have provided an alternative model for analyzing the physical 
changes in a system that requires an understanding of how: 
• The work done on a body is the product of the force exerted and the displacement 
of the body in the direction of the force. 
• Gravitational and elastic potential energies are associated with position (relative 
to positions of zero potential energy that are selected strategically). 
• Kinetic energy is associated with momentum (mass and velocity). 
• Gravitational potential, elastic potential and kinetic energies are collectively 
referred to as mechanical energies. 
• By considering the types of energy of all bodies at different positions and times, 
kinematics problems can be solved; unlike the suvat equations (which require 
uniform acceleration), energies can be calculated irrespective of the route taken. 
• Energy is a conserved quantity, which means that it can be transferred but not 
created or destroyed. 
• Work is done when energy is transferred and energy is transferred when work is done. 
• Power is the rate at which work is done or energy is transferred. 
• The upper limit of efficiency, the ratio of the useful energy (or power output) to 
the total energy (or power input), is 1. 
• Sankey diagrams are a visual representation of the input and output energy types 
and the efficiency of the system. 

=== PAGE 129 ===
Practice questions 
I. A competition includes an obstacle where the competitor has to jump 
onto a hanging cylinder, causing it to move along an inclined wire with 
negligible friction. 
C=::J 
(a) The cylinder has mass 100 kg and the competitor has mass 80 kg. The 
competitor is moving at 10 m s-1 when they catch the cylinder and 
leave the ground. Using g = 10 m s-2, calculate: 
(i) the impulse experienced by the cylinder 
(ii) the impulse experienced by the competitor 
(iii) the kinetic energy of the cylinder and competitor just after 
catching the cylinder. 
(2) 
(1) 
(1) 
(b) Determine whether the competitor will get to the far end of the wire. 
(2) 
(Total 6 marks) 
2. 
A 10 kg block is pulled a distance of 4 m along a frictionless ramp inclined 
at an angle of20° by an 8 kg hanging mass as shown in the diagram on the 
right. 
(a) Calculate: 
(i) the work done by the gravitational force 
(1) 
(ii) the increase in potential energy of the sliding mass. 
(1) 
(iii) Why are the answers to (i) and (ii) different? 
(1) 
(b) The hanging mass is replaced by an electric motor and winch, which 
consumes 400 J of energy lifting the block to the same height. If the 
purpose of the machine is to raise the block, calculate the efficiency of 
the motor/ramp system. 
(2) 
(Total 5 marks) 
3. 
A 0.25 kg ball is launched from the ground with initial speed of20 m s-1 
and reaches a maximum height of 10 m. 
(a) Calculate the speed of the projectile when it reaches maximum height. (2) 
(b) The projectile lands in a bucket with wheels. Calculate the velocity of 
the bucket plus ball after the ball has landed in the bucket if the mass 
of the bucket is 1.2 5 kg. 
(2) 
(c) The bucket and ball are stopped by a buffer, which is made from a 
spring that becomes compressed. If the change in length of the spring 
is 10 cm, calculate the spring constant. 
(2) 
(Total 6 marks) 
83 

=== PAGE 130 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
"' 30 
t Wt¥ 
'~ 
I,, e 25 
-a-
r 
:j: 
20 l i H 
15 
10 
;4IT 
5 ~Tl'" ttt~~ M-~ 
0 
0 
5 
10 
I 5 
20 25 30 
x/m 
84 
4. A stone is falling at a constant velocity vertically down a tube filled with oil. 
Which of the following statements about the energy transfers of the stone 
during its motion are correct? 
I. 
The gain in kinetic energy is less than the loss in gravitational 
potential energy. 
II. The sum of kinetic and gravitational potential energy of the stone 
is constant. 
III. The work done by the force of gravity has the same magnitude as the 
work done by friction. 
A 
I and II only 
B 
I and III only 
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III 
(rota! 1 mark) 
5. The Sankey diagram shows the energy input from fuel that is eventually 
transferred to useful domestic energy in the form oflight in a filament 
lamp. What is true for this Sankey diagram? 
6. 
7. 
A 
The overall efficiency of the process is 10%. 
energy loss at power station 
energy loss in transmission 
thermal energy to lamp 
light energy to lamp 
B 
Generation and transmission losses account for 5 5% of the energy input. 
C 
Useful energy accounts for half of the transmission losses. 
D 
The energy loss in the power station equals the energy that leaves it. 
(rota! 1 mark) 
The graph on the left shows how the acceleration a of an object varies with 
distance traveled x. The mass of the object is 3.0 kg. What is the total work 
done on the object? 
A 
300] 
B 
400] 
C 
1200} 
D 1500} 
(rota! 1 mark) 
An object of mass m is initially at rest. When an impulse I acts on the 
object, its final kinetic energy is Ek. What is the final kinetic energy when an 
impulse of 2/ acts on an object of mass 2m initially at rest? 
E, 
A 2 
D 
4Ek 
(rota! 1 mark) 

=== PAGE 131 ===
8. 
A train on a straight horizontal track moves from rest at constant 
acceleration. The horizontal forces on the train are the engine force and 
a resistive force that increases with speed. Which graph represents the 
variation with time t of the power P developed by the engine? 
A 
B 
p 
p 
C 
D 
p . 
p 
D~-----~ 
0 
(Total 1 mark) 
9. 
A car traveling at a constant velocity covers a distance of 100 min 5.0 s. 
The thrust of the engine is 1.5 kN. What is the power of the car? 
A 
0.75kW 
B 
3.0 kW 
C 
7.5kW 
D 
30kW 
(Total 1 mark) 
10. The energy density of a substance can be calculated by multiplying its 
specific energy (energy per unit mass) with which quantity? 
A 
mass 
B 
volume 
C 
mass 
volume 
D 
volume 
mass 
(Total 1 mark) 
11. The diagram shows part of a downhill ski course that starts at point A, 50 
m above level ground. Point B is 20 m above level ground. A skier of mass 
65 kg starts from rest at point A and, during the ski course, some of the 
gravitational potential energy is transferred to kinetic energy. 
A 
C 
D 
◄ 
► 
24m 
85 

=== PAGE 132 ===
SPACE, TIME AND MOTION A.3 
Work, energy and power 
86 
(a) From A to B, 24% of the gravitational potential energy is transferred to 
kinetic energy. Show that the velocity at B is 12 m s- 1• 
(2) 
(b) The dot on the following diagram represents the skier as she passes 
point B. Draw and label the vertical forces acting on the skier. 
(2) 
(c) The hill at point B has a circular shape with a radius of 20 m. Determine 
whether the skier will lose contact with the ground at point B. 
(3) 
(d) The skier reaches point C with a speed of 8.2 m s- 1• She stops after 
a distance of 24 mat point D. Determine the coefficient of dynamic 
friction between the base of the skis and the snow. Assume that the 
frictional force is constant and that air resistance can be neglected. 
(3) 
(e) At the side of the course, flexible safety nets are used. Another skier 
of mass 76 kg falls normally into the safety net with speed 9.6 m s- 1• 
Calculate the impulse required from the net to stop the skier and give 
an appropriate unit for your answer. 
(2) 
(f) Explain, with reference to change in momentum, why a flexible safety 
net is less likely to harm the skier than a rigid barrier. 
(2) 
(Total 14 marks) 
12. A company designs a spring system for loading ice blocks onto a truck. 
The ice block is placed in a holder Hin front of the spring, and an electric 
motor compresses the spring by pushing H to the left. When the spring is 
released, the ice block is accelerated toward a ramp, ABC. When the spring 
is fully decompressed, the ice block loses contact with the spring at A. 
The mass of the ice block is 5 5 kg. Assume that the surface of the ramp is 
frictionless and that the masses of the spring and the holder are negligible 
compared to the mass of the ice block. 
~-ic-e-bl_o_ck __ 
B~ 
(a) (i) The block arrives at C with a speed of 0.90 m s-1• Show that the 
elastic energy stored in the spring is 670 J. 
(2) 
(ii) Calculate the speed of the block at A. 
(2) 
(b) Describe the motion of the block: 
(i) from A to B with reference to Newton's first law 
(ii) from B to C with reference to Newton's second law. 
(1) 
(2) 

=== PAGE 133 ===
(c) Copy the axes below and sketch a graph to show how the displacement 
of the block varies with time from A to C. (You do not have to put 
numbers on the axes.) 
(d) The spring decompression takes 0.42 s. Determine the average force 
(2) 
that the spring exerts on the block. 
(2) 
(e) The electric motor is connected to an electrical source of power 816 W. 
The motor takes 1.5 s to compress the spring. Estimate the efficiency of 
iliemoro~ 
~ 
(Total 13 marks) 
13. (a) Will hanging a magnet in front of an iron car, as shown, make the 
car go? 
A 
Yes, it will go. 
B 
It will move if there is no friction. 
C 
It will not go. 
(1) 
(b) Explain your answer. 
(1) 
(Total 2 marks) 
14. A neutron moving through heavy water strikes an isolated and stationary 
deuteron (the nucleus of an isotope of hydrogen) head on in an elastic 
collision. 
(a) Assuming the mass of the neutron is equal to half that of the deuteron, 
find the ratio of the final speed of the deuteron to the initial speed of 
the neutron. 
(b) What percentage of the initial kinetic energy is transferred to the 
(2) 
deuteron? 
(2) 
(c) How many collisions would be needed to slow the neutron down from 
10 MeV to O.Dl eV? 
(2) 
(Total 6 marks) 
eV is a unit of energy 
and a conversion into J 
is not required. 
87 

=== PAGE 134 ===
B The particulate 
nature of matter 

=== PAGE 135 ===
B The particulate nature of matter 
◄ 
This flood in Seoul, South Korea, in August 2022 followed heavier rainfall than any seen in the area for 
the previous 80 years. During the same week, western Europe experienced a heatwave. The increasing 
frequency of extreme weather events is linked to global warming. 
Klaus Hasselmann, based at the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology in Hamburg, 
Germany, was one of the winners of the Nobel Prize for Physics in 2021 'for the 
physical modeling of Earth's climate, quantifying variability and reliably predicting 
global warming' (Nobel Prize, 2021). Our awareness today that global warming 
is caused by increasing CO2 in the atmosphere is in part a result of Hasselmann's 
advocacy and modeling work. 
A model is a representation of reality. During your study of matter, you will consider 
the energies and momentum changes of individual particles (in which assumptions 
are made about elasticity, size and forces experienced) and the collective properties of 
substances in macroscopic containers. Part of what made Hasselmann so successful 
was his acknowledgement that short-term weather fluctuations and broader climate 
trends cannot be fully understood in terms of individual spheres behaving as perfect 
ballistic projectiles. 
These chapters commence by defining density, temperature, internal energy, heat 
transfer, phase, luminosity, brightness and emissivity, and getting to know how 
particles are involved in conduction, convection and radiation. These abstract concepts 
are then brought into sharp real-world focus through the greenhouse effect, which 
describes the processes by which radiation from the Sun interacts with the Earth and 
its atmosphere and the enhanced impact that human activities are making. Armed 
with an awareness of the very small and the very big, you will be well-placed to grapple 
with theory, problems, experiments and modeling of your own on the gas laws. 
The chapters on Thermal energy transfers (B. l), the Greenhouse effect (B.2) and Gas 
laws (B.3) relate to particles that, in general, do not interact with each other except 
when touching or when radiation passes between them. Another property of particles 
is charge. Differences in charges across spaces lead to electric fields, and electric 
fields are regions in which electric forces are exerted. In a similar way to how a ball 
falls when released from a height, charged particles move in a net direction when 
constrained within electrical conductors that form a complete circuit. They release the 
energy provided by a source of emf in resistors. 
89 
