=== PAGE 164 ===
Greenhouse effect 

=== PAGE 165 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B .2 
◄ 
This photograph of the Earth was taken in 1968 during the Apollo 8 astronauts' return from orbiting the 
Moon. It reveals a lot on the greenhouse effect that has relevance in this chapter: not all of the Earth is 
illuminated by the Sun at a time; there are variations in how reflective different surfaces are; and the 
Earth is surrounded by swirling gases known as the atmosphere. What this snapshot cannot reveal is 
the impact that humans are having on the balance of thermal energy and temperature overall. 
Guiding Questions 
How does the greenhouse effect help to maintain life on Earth and how does 
human activity enhance this effect? 
How is the atmosphere as a system modeled to quantify the Earth-
atmosphere energy balance? 
The Sun can be considered to be a black-body radiator so we can use Wei n's law to find 
the temperature of its surface and the Stefan-Boltzmann law to find the power emitted 
per unit area and hence the total power. This radiation spreads out according to the 
inverse square relationship and is incident on the Earth, but before it can reach us on 
the ground, it must pass through the atmosphere. Here, we will investigate how the 
different wavelengths interact with the gases in the atmosphere. 
Nature of Science 
We can model the behavior of a small amount of ideal gas trapped in a cylinder 
quite accurately but modeling the whole atmosphere is quite different. To 
model the atmosphere, computer programs are used in an attempt to make 
predictions. However, we cannot run experiments to see if these predictions are 
correct. In 1988, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was 
established by the United Nations Environmental Programme and the World 
Meteorological Organization to provide the decision-makers of the world with a 
clear scientific view on the current state of knowledge in climate change and its 
potential environmental and socio-economic impacts. 
There are problems associated with the use of energy. It will be up to the 
imagination and creativity of future scientists to solve them. 
Students should understand: 
conservation of energy 
emissivity as the ratio of the power radiated per unit area by a surface compared to that of an 
ideal black surface at the same temperature as given by emissivity = 
power radiated per unit area 
aT' 
albedo as a measure of the average energy reflected off a macroscopic system as given by 
total scattered power 
albedo= total incident power 
Earth's albedo varies daily and is dependent on cloud formations and latitude 
the solar constant S 
the incoming radiative power is dependent on the projected surface of a planet along the 
direction of the path of the rays, resulting in a mean value of the incoming intensity being ¾ 
• • 
119 

=== PAGE 166 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
8.2 Figure 1 
► 
Electromagnetic spectrum of 
sunlight. 
methane CH4, water vapor H20, carbon dioxide CO2, and nitrous oxide N20 are the main 
greenhouse gases, and each has origins that are both natural and created by human activity 
absorption of infrared radiation by the main greenhouse gases in terms of the molecular 
energy levels and the subsequent emission of radiation in all directions 
the greenhouse effect can be explained in terms of a resonance model and molecular energy 
levels 
the augmentation of the greenhouse effect due to human activities is known as the enhanced 
greenhouse effect. 
Radiation from the Sun 
500 
I 000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
wavelength/nm 
The spectrum oflight arriving at the edge of the Earth's atmosphere, as shown 
in Figure 1, has a peak value at about 500 nm. This is in the green region of the 
visible spectrum. Putting this value into Wien's displacement law equation gives a 
temperature of 5800 K. 
Now we know the temperature of the Sun, we can use the Stefan-Boltzmann law to 
calculate the power radiated per unit area: 
P= AcrT4 
p A= 5.67 X 10-8 X 58004 = 6.42 X 107W 
The radius of the Sun = 6.9 x 108 m so the surface area = 4nr 2 
= 6.0 x 1018 m2, which means that the total power radiated 
= 3.9 X 1026 W. 
The Earth is 1.5 x 1011 m from the Sun so the power per unit area (also known as 
intensity or apparent brightness) at the Earth will be: 
p 
3.9 X lQ26 
T=-- =----- = 1400Wm-2 
4,rr2 
4,r(l.5 X 1011) 2 
in the visible region, 
This quantity is called the solar constant, S. 
Although the peak is t 
sunlight also contains 
ultraviolet {l 0%) and 
infrared (50%). 
~---
120 

=== PAGE 167 ===
Interaction between solar radiation and 
the atmosphere 
,:r 
;; 
>.. 
u 
&i g. 
... 
J: 
t = 
OJ 
~ 
"' 
~ 
Electromagnetic radiation spreads out as a wave, rather like a water wave, but in 
three dimensions. A water wave has peaks and troughs that spread across the 
water; electromagnetic waves have peaks and troughs in electromagnetic fields that 
spread through a vacuum at speed v. The distance between the peaks is called the 
wavelength J., and the number of oscillations per second is called the frequency f 
These quantities are related by the equation: 
10
19 gamma rays 
O.D!nm 
V == J A 
The electromagnetic radiation from the Sun can be split into three regions 
according to their wavelength: ultraviolet, visible and infrared. Ultraviolet has the 
shortest wavelength and highest frequency, infrared has the longest wavelength 
and lowest frequency, and visible light is in-between. These types of radiation 
interact with the atmosphere in different ways. 
Ultraviolet radiation 
Ultraviolet radiation has the highest energy, enough to split molecules. Ultraviolet 
radiation is absorbed by oxygen molecules (0i} and splits them into two oxygen 
atoms (20). The atoms can then join with 0 2 molecules to form ozone (0 3), which 
forms a thin layer in the upper atmosphere where it absorbs ultraviolet radiation as 
it splits it into 0 2 and 0. Most of the higher energy ultraviolet radiation is absorbed 
in this way. This can be represented by the absorption spectrum in Figure 3, where 
100% means that all of the radiation of that wavelength is absorbed. 
UV 
IR 
wavelength 
Visible light 
Visible light excites atoms. In other words, the atoms absorb the energy of the light. An 
excited atom is unstable so will re-emit the light a short time later. You might expect that 
the atmosphere would absorb all the visible light, but it does not. If it did, the atmosphere 
would not be transparent. The reason for this is that the atoms can only be excited by 
certain specific energies, so only these are absorbed, leaving the rest to pass through. 
10
18 
10 17 
10
16 
JO" 
10 1• 
JO" 
10" 
JO" 
10
10 
This gives rise to dark lines in the spectrum of light received on the Earth because the re-
emitted radiation does not come out in the same direction as the original. You will find out 
more about this when you study atomic models and learn about electron energy levels. 
Infrared radiation 
Infrared radiation is produced by the vibration of molecules. The molecules of a solid 
vibrate in bodies that have thermal energy and infrared radiation is emitted. So, infrared 
radiation is associated with hot bodies. This is the radiation that we can feel coming from 
a fire and is detected in night vision cameras. When infrared radiation is absorbed, it 
makes molecules vibrate, which is why you get hot standing in front of a fire. 
0.1 nm 
X-rays 
! nm 
400nm 
JO nm 
ultraviolet 
100nm 
500nm 
visible 
nearlR 
{ 1000 nm 
lµm 
600nm 
infrared 
JOµm 
thermal IR 
JOOµm 
700nm 
JOOOµm 
I cm 
microwaves 
JO cm 
radio waves 
• 
B.2 Figure 2 The 
electromagnetic spectrum 
Waves can be classified in 
terms of their wavelength. 
Each range of wavelengths 
has a different name. mode 
of production and uses. 
B.2 Figure 3 Absorption of 
electromagnetic radiation by 
ozone. 
121 

=== PAGE 168 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
8.2 Figure 4 Absorption of ► 
electromagnetic radiation by 
carbon dioxide. 
8.2 Figure 5 Absorption of ~ 
electromagnetic radiation by 
water. 
What relevance do 
simple harmonic 
motion and resonance 
have to climate change? 
{Cl. C.4) 
8.2 Figure 6 Spectrum of 
light reaching the Earth's 
surface. 
122 
Certain molecules present in the atmosphere (e.g. carbon dioxide CO2, water vapor H2O, 
nitrous oxide N2O, and methane CH4} can be made to vibrate by infrared radiation, but 
they only absorb the frequency of radiation that is the same as their natural frequency. 
This is called resonance and is similar to someone pushing a child on a swing. If the 
frequency of pushing matches the natural frequency of the swing, maximum energy 
is transferred from the pusher to the swing. Once the molecule starts to vibrate, it will 
re-emit the radiation in a random direction (including toward space), which results in less 
radiation reaching the Earth. The absorption spectrum for CO2 is shown in Figure 4. 
Notice the three distinct peaks; -each is due to a different mode of vibration of the molecule. 
UV 
visible 
IR 
wavelength 
Although CO2 is the most talked about absorber of infrared radiation, water has the 
greatest effect. This is not only due to its absorption characteristics, shown in Figure 5, 
but also because it is more abundant in the atmosphere. 
UV 
wavelength 
Radiation reaching the Earth 
By the time the black-body radiation from the Sun reaches the surface of the Earth, a 
lot of wavelengths have been absorbed by the different gases in the atmosphere. The 
spectrum now looks something like Figure 6. The actual amount of energy absorbed 
will vary with latitude since the sunlight has to pass through more atmosphere to 
reach the surface at the poles than at the equator. 
0 
0 
500 
spectrum aniving at atmosphere 
spectrum arriving at Earth 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2 500 
3000 
wavelength/nm 

=== PAGE 169 ===
Interaction between light and solids 
When the radiation hits the surface of the Earth, some is reflected and some is absorbed. 
The molecules in solids are much closer than the molecules in a gas. This results in electron 
energy bands rather than the discrete levels of a single atom. Solids can therefore emit and 
absorb many more wavelengths oflight than low-pressure gases. When electromagnetic 
radiation is incident on a solid surface, there are three main possibilities: 
• It may be absorbed then re-emitted in the opposite direction. This is reflection 
or scattering. 
• It may be absorbed, transferring energy to electrons, which in turn pass the energy to 
molecular kinetic energy, resulting in an increase in temperature. 
• It may not be absorbed but pass through the material. 
When dealing with the surface of the Earth, we can discount the last option since no radiation 
will pass through the Earth. Whether a particular wavelength photon (particle oflight) is 
absorbed or reflected depends upon the material of the surface; it is this that makes different 
materials have different colors. A red object appears red because it reflects red photons but 
absorbs the other colors, a white object reflects all colors and a black object reflects none. 
Albedo 
The ratio of scattered to total incident power is called the albedo: 
b d _ total scattered power 
al e o -
l . .d 
tota 111e1 ent power 
Different surfaces have different albedos; for example, the albedo of snow is 0.9 since 
almost all of the light is reflected, whereas the albedo of asphalt is 0.04. If we consider 
the whole Earth, then we should also take into account the light scattered by the clouds. 
This gives an average albedo of 0.3. 
Emissivity (e) 
Not all bodies are perfect black-body radiators so they emit Eess radiation than predicted by 
the equation for a perfect black-body radiator. The ratio of the energy radiated by a body to 
the energy radiated by a perfect black body at the same temperature is called the emissivity. 
So, for a body with emissivity e, the power radiated is given by the adapted equation: 
P=eAcrr 
The emissivity of a black body is 1; other materials will have emissivity less than 1 (see Table 1). 
Note that the total power radiated from a star is known as the luminosity, L. 
Emissivity is the ratio of actual thermal energy emitted to that which would be emitted 
by a black body. We can express this in terms of energy or power by the equation: 
. 
. . 
power radiated per unit area 
em1ss1v1ty = 
tJT' 
The greenhouse effect 
Since the atmosphere does not absorb much visible light, the visible light reflected from 
the Earth's surface will pass back out through the atmosphere. 
The absorbed light will cause the temperature of the surface to rise so it will emit radiation 
at a peak wavelength given by 0-0~ 29. The Earth is not very hot so this peak is in the infrared 
region, which means that the radiation is absorbed by carbon dioxide (CO2), water vapor 
(Hp), nitrous oxide (N20), and methane (CH4) in the atmosphere. These molecules then 
Using the color picker 
tool in photo-editing 
software, you can 
measure the amount 
of red, green. and 
blue light reflected on 
different surfaces in a 
digital photograph. 
If more light is reflected 
from the Earth. then 
less energy is absorbed. 
so the tempera tu re 
will be less. One way 
of increasing the 
amount of radiation 
reflected would be to 
paint surfaces white. If 
asphalt was white, how 
much difference would 
that make? 
Material 
Emissivity 
(at O 
0 () 
Polished 
0.02 
aluminum 
Brick 
0.85 
Dull b lack 
0.94 
paper 
... 
B.2 Table 1 Emissivity of 
different materials. 
123 

=== PAGE 170 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
absorbs like a disk 
.. 
8.2 Figure 7 To an 
imaginary observer on the 
Sun. the Earth would look 
like a circle. 
The radiation from the 
Sun hits the Earth from 
one direction so the 
Earth absorbs the same 
amount of radiation as 
if it were a disk. In this 
case, power absorbed 
= l 400Jl"r2. However, 
the Earth is actually a 
sphere so: 
power absorbed per 
unit area 
l 400.n-r1 _ 1400 
4m2-- 4-
= 3sowm-2 
350Wm ' 
350Wm 2 
124 
re-emit the radiation in random directions so some ofit returns to the Earth. The net result 
is that the energy leaving the Earth is reduced, resulting in a lower emissivity. This effect is 
called the greenhouse effect due to its sim ilarity with the way glass traps thermal energy 
in a greenhouse. The gases that cause the effect are called greenhouse gases. 
Energy balance 
Imagine we could build the solar system by taking a sun at 5800 Kand putting a OK 
Earth in orbit at a distance of 1.5 x 1011 m. The Earth would absorb energy from the Sun 
causing its temperature to rise. As the Earth's temperature rose above OK, it would begin 
to radiate energy itself. The amount of energy radiated would increase until the amount 
of energy radiated equaled the amount of energy absorbed and equilibrium was reached. 
Earth without atmosphere 
To understand the principle of energy balance, we will first consider the simplified 
version of a perfectly black Earth without atmosphere. We have already calculated the 
power received per unit area at the Earth as 1400 W m-2. This radiation only lands on 
one side of the Earth, so treating the Earth as a disk of radius 6400 km, we can calculate 
the total power incident at the surface: 
power 
incident power = -- x area of Earth= 1400 x 1rr 2 = 1400 x 1r x (6.4 x 106) 2 
area 
= 1.8 X 1017W 
To find the average power per un it area over the whole Earth, we must divide by the surface 
area of the Earth (4m2). Note that, this time, we take the Earth to be a sphere, which results 
in an average intensity of~-
As the temperature of the Earth increases, it will emit radiation which, according to the 
Stefan-Boltzmann law, will be proportional to the fourth power of the temperature in 
kelvin. So when the temperature is T, the power radiated per unit area is given by: 
power per unit area= a T 4 
The total power radiated can be found by multiplying this value by the area of the 
Earth. This time, we must use the total area of the sphere since energy is radiated by all 
parts, not just the side facing the Sun: 
power radiated from Earth = aT4 x 4m-2 
power = 2.9 x 107 x T4 W 
The temperature of the Earth will rise until the incident power= radiated power: 
1.8 X 1017W = 2.9 X 107 xT 4 
1.8 X lQl7 
T = 4 
2_9 x 107 = 280K 
Earth with atmosphere 
The previous example is not realistic because not all the radiation is absorbed by the 
ground: some is scattered by the atmosphere (particularly clouds) and some is reflected off 
the surface. The average albedo of the Earth is 0.3, which means that only ;0 of the power 
will be absorbed by the ground. So the power absorbed = 0.7 x 1.8 x 1017 = 1.26 x 1017W. 

=== PAGE 171 ===
Also, the power radiated is not as high because the Earth is not a black body and the 
greenhouse gases re-radiate some of the infrared radiation emitted by the Earth back to 
the ground. This results in an emissivity of around 0.6. 
So: power radiated from Earth = 0.6 x 2.9 x 107 x T4 W 
= l.74xl07 xT4 W 
Equilibrium will therefore be reached when 1.26 x 1017 = 1.74 x 107 x T 4 which gives a 
value ofT = 292 K. 
\Ve can see that the atmosphere has two competing effects: the clouds raise the 
albedo, resulting in less power reaching the Earth, but the greenhouse gases make the 
emissivity lower, resulting in a higher overall temperature. 
Figure 8 is a very simplified picture of the energy flow. Figure 9 is a more complete 
(but still simplified) representation showing some of the detail of the exchange of 
energy between the ground and the atmosphere. Notice that the atmosphere absorbs 
energy in two ways: 358W m-2 is absorbed by greenhouse gases and 105 W m-2 due to 
convection and the energy used to turn water into water vapor. 
105Wm-2 
2 5 W -2 
350 
-------,172 ./------1 
399 
Challenge yourself 
1. Estimate the average surface temperature of the Moon. 
B.2 Figure 8 Energy flow 
with some reflected energy. 
B.2 Figure 9 The numbers 
in this diagram represent 
power per unit area in W m·2_ 
W hat limitations 
are there in using a 
resonance model to 
explain the greenhouse 
effect? (C.4) 
125 

=== PAGE 172 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
B.2Table2 
Energy in/J m- 2 
15 452 640000 
.... 
B.2Table3 
126 
Exercise 
QI. Use Figure 9 to answer the following questions. 
(a) What is the total power per square meter absorbed by the atmosphere? 
(b) How much of the incident radiation is reflected from the surface? 
(c) What is the albedo of the Earth? 
(d) How much power per square meter is re-radiated by the atmosphere? 
(e) What percentage of the energy radiated from the Earth passes straight 
through the atmosphere? 
We cannot do experiments to see the effect of changing the albedo of the Earth. but we can 
set up computer models to see what might happen. Using a spreadsheet, we can make a 
simple model to predict the final temperature of the Earth given certain starting conditions. 
We are going to start the Earth off with an initial temperature of, say, 20 K and calculate how 
much the temperature will rise in a certain time interval. 
The first thing we need to do is enter the variables and constants. These can be entered into 
a table on the side of the spreadsheet as in Table 2. 
Solar constant SM/m-2 
350 
Albedo a 
0.3 
Emissivity e 
0.6 
+ 
I Time interval/yrs 
2 
Initial temp T/K 
20 
Next we will add some formulae to calculate the initial conditions of the Earth using the 
headers in Table 3 (Note: al I energy and power values are for 1 m2 of Earth). 
I 
Power 
radiatedM/ m-2 
Energy 
out/J m-2 
Energy 
added/J m-2 
Change in 
temperature/K 
New temperature/ 
K 
0.0054432 
343313.5 G
45229668 
38.6307417 
20 
The columns are as follows: 
Time: a starting value, O; subsequent times will be this plus the time interval. 
Energy in: solar constant x (l - albedo) x time interval in seconds 
( = J$ l*(l-J$2)*J$4*3600'24*365) 
Power radiated: emissivity x a x T4 where Tis the initial temperature, in this case, 20 K 
( : J$3*0.000 000 056 7'J$5A4). 
Energy out: power out x time interval in seconds ( = C2*J$4*3600*24*365). 
Energy added: energy in - energy out ( = B2 - D2). 
7 
Change in temp: calculated using the surface heat capacity, which is 4 x l 08 J m-2 K-7; this is 
rather like the specific heat capacity with area instead of mass, so t:,. T = fwhere Eis the heat 
received per unit area ( = 400~
000 ). 
• 
New temperature: this is simply the initial temperature; subsequent values will be 
calculated from the previous temperature + the change in temperature. Enter= $J$5 to take 
the temperature from the table. 

=== PAGE 173 ===
Once this row has been fixed, the formulae are put in the next row to calculate the heat lost 
at the new temperature (Table 4). 
• 
Energy in/J m-2 
Power 
Energy 
radiated/W m- 2 
out/J m-2 
15452 640000 
0.0054432 
343 313.5104 
15452 640000 
1 
o.402 009 08 
25355516.7 
Time: previous time+ time interval ( = A2+J$4). 
Energy in: solar constant x {l - albedo) x time interval in seconds 
( = J$ l *(l -J$2)'J$4*3600*24*365). 
Energy 
added/J m-2 
15452296686 
15427284483 
Power radiated: emissivity x ax T4 where T is the new temperature; this is the temperature 
of the last time interval + the change in temperature 
( = J$3·o ooooooos6rG3A4) 
Energy out: power out x time interval in seconds ( = C3*J$4*3600*24*365). 
Energy added: energy in - energy out ( = B3 - D3). 
Change in temperature: ( = ~000~ 0000 ). 
New temperature: change in temperature+ previous temperature ( = F2 + G2). 
These formulae are now copied down for fifty rows by high lighting row 3 and dragging 
down. {Note: it is row 3 you copy down, not row 2, which just contains the starting values.) 
To plot a graph, highlight column A, then while pressing control, highlight column G. This will 
leave both A and G highlighted. Now insert scatter graph, giving Figure 11. 
solar constant S 350 
albedo a 
0.3 
~ 350 
3 300 
e 
f250 
£ 
200 
150 
100 
50 
emissivity e 
0.6 
time interval/yrs 2 
initial temp T 
20 
0 +--~----~----~-~ 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
I 00 
120 
time/years 
You can now find out what happens if you change the values of albedo, emissivity, etc 
Global warming 
The spreadsheet simulation shows that if the energy in is not balanced with energy out, 
then the average temperature of the Earth will change. A rise in average temperature 
is called global warming and can be caused by four factors: solar constant, albedo, 
emissivity and quantity of greenhouse gases. 
Increase in solar constant 
The amount of energy reaching the Earth depends on how much energy the Sun is 
giving out and the distance between the Earth and the Sun. Neither of these is constant. 
The Earth's orbit is elliptical so the orbital radius changes. There are also some changes 
due to the change of angle of the Earth's axis in relation to the Sun; these variations are 
called Milankovitch cycles. 
Change in 
temp/K 
New temp/K 
38.63074172 
38.568211 21 
... 
20 
58.63074172 
B.2Table4 
Although this 
simulation aids our 
understanding of the 
underlying physics, it 
is a much simplified 
version of reality and 
should not be taken to 
represent reality. There 
are, however, some 
much more complex 
computer simulations 
that are thought to 
come close. 
B.2 Figure 10 Graph of 
temperature against time. 
... 
The increase in temperature 
as a result of many sunspots 
leads to solar flares, which 
are Jets of gas flying out from 
the Sun's surface like huge 
flames. 
127 

=== PAGE 174 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
How is the 
understanding of 
systems applied to other 
areas of physics? 
(e.g. E4 , E.5) 
Global warming is an 
international problem 
that requires an 
· nternational solution. 
What measures are 
the government and 
people making in the 
country where you live? 
128 
The Sun's surface is an ever-changing swirling mass of gas that sometimes sends out flares 
many tens of thousands of kilometers high. More easily viewed from the Earth are the 
number of sunspots, which can be seen if an image of the Sun is projected onto a screen 
(never look directly at the Sun). The number of sunspots present gives an indication of the 
amount of energy emitted; more sunspots implies more energy. This seems the wrong way 
round but it is the gas around the sunspot that emits the energy, not the sunspot itself. 
Reduced albedo 
Albedo is the ratio of reflected to total incident radiation. If the albedo is low, then 
more energy is absorbed by the Earth, resulting in a higher equilibrium temperature. 
Snow has a high albedo so a reduction in the amount of snow present at the poles and 
on glaciers would reduce the albedo. 
Reduced emissivity 
The emissivity is related to the greenhouse effect, which reduces the amount 
of radiation leaving the Earth at a given temperature. Increasing the amount of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will result in a higher equilibrium temperature. 
Enhanced greenhouse effect 
There is a lot of evidence that the burning of fossils fuels, which produce carbon dioxide 
at a faster rate than the living trees remove it, has led to an increase in the percentage 
of CO2 in the atmosphere. This has enhanced the greenhouse effect, causing more 
energy to be radiated back to Earth. If more radiation returns to the Earth, then more 
must be emitted, resulting in a higher average temperature. This effect is made worse by 
deforestation because fewer trees are available to store the carbon dioxide. 
What can be done 
To reduce the enhanced greenhouse effect, the levels of greenhouse gases must be 
reduced, or at the very least, the rate at which they are increasing must be slowed 
down. There are several ways that this can be achieved: 
1 Greater efficiency of power production 
In recent years, the efficiency of power plants has been increasing significantly. 
According to the second law of thermodynamics, they can never be 100% efficient but 
some of the older, less efficient ones could be replaced. This would mean that producing 
the same amount of power would require less fuel, resulting in reduced CO2 emission. 
2 Replacing the use of coal and oil with natural gas 
Gas-fired power stations are more efficient than oil and gas and produce less CO2. 
3 Use of combined heating and power systems (CHP) 
Using the excess thermal energy from power stations to heat homes would result in a 
more efficient use of fuel. 
4 Increased use of renewable energy sources and nuclear power 
Replacing fossil fuel burning power stations with alternatives such as wave power, 
solar power and wind power would reduce CO2 emissions. 

=== PAGE 175 ===
5 Use of electric vehicles 
A large amount of the oil used today is used for transport and, even without global 
warming, there will be a problem when the oil runs out. Cars that run on electricity are 
already in production. Aeroplanes will also have to use a different fuel. 
6 Carbon dioxide capture and storage 
A different way of reducing greenhouse gases is to remove CO2 from the waste gases of 
power stations and store it underground. 
An international problem 
Global warming is an international problem, and if any solution is going to work, 
then it must be a joint international solution. Before working on the solution, the 
international community had to agree on pinpointing the problem and it was to this 
end that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was formed. 
Guiding Questions revisited 
How does the greenhouse effect help to maintain life on Earth and how does 
human activity enhance this effect? 
How is the atmosphere as a system modeled to quantify the Earth-
atmosphere energy balance? 
In this chapter, we have studied different variables that enable us to understand that: 
• The Sun's radiation forms a spectrum including ultraviolet (which is absorbed 
by oxygen molecules), visible light (which passes through the atmosphere except 
for a few discrete wavelengths) and infrared (which is absorbed by methane, 
water, carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide molecules before being re-emitted in all 
directions). 
• Energy is incident on the Earth from the Sun with an intensity referred to as the 
solar constant. 
• On average, 30% of the incident energy is reflected because of the Earth's albedo. 
• The energy that is absorbed by the Earth is later emitted in the infrared region, 
which means that greenhouse gas molecules in the atmosphere will absorb and 
re-emit some of this radiation back toward the Earth 's surface (and, in turn, reduce 
the Earth's overall emissivity). 
• In the absence of any greenhouse effect, the Earth's surface temperature would be 
cooler than is needed to maintain life. 
• The burning of fossil fuels (e.g. to heat houses, to travel and to generate electricity) 
and deforestation (e.g. wood for manufacturing) are contributing to greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere, which in turn is enhancing the greenhouse effect. 
• The enhanced greenhouse effect and its associated reduction in emissivity is 
contributing to global warming, which is an increase in the Earth's average 
temperature, which in turn reduces albedo (due to the melting of snow at the 
poles and on glaciers). 
How do different 
methods of electricity 
production affect the 
energy balance of the 
atmosphere? (B.5. E 4) 
How are developments 
in science and 
technology affected 
by climate change 
and other important 
international concerns? 
(NOS) 
129 

=== PAGE 176 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
There is a general 
expectation that you 
will become familiar 
with mechanisms for 
electricity generation 
and heating over the 
course of I B physics 
These questions may 
require you to draw 
upon your existing 
knowledge or to carry 
out research (e.g. in a 
library or online). 
130 
Practice questions 
1. 
(a) Fossil fuels are being used continuously for electricity production. 
Outline why fossil fuels are classed as non-renewable. 
(2) 
(b) Some energy consultants suggest that the solution to the problem of 
carbon dioxide pollution is to use nuclear energy for the generation of 
electrical energy. Identify two disadvantages of the use of nuclear fission 
when compared to the burning of fossil fuels for the generation of 
electrical energy. 
(2) 
(Total 4 marks) 
2. 
(a) By reference to energy transfers, distinguish between a solar panel and 
a solar cell. 
(2) 
Some students carry out an investigation on a solar panel. They measure 
the output temperature of the water for different solar input powers and for 
different rates of extraction of thermal energy. The results are shown on the graph. 
350 
340 
~ e 
.3 330 
e 
8. 
E 
E ;; 320 
C. 
:5 
0 
310 
300+-----~--~--~--~---~ 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
input power/W 
(b) Use the data from the graph to answer the following. 
(i) The solar panel is to provide water at 340 K while extracting 
energy at a rate of 300 W when the intensity of the sunlight 
incident normally on the panel is 800 W m-2• Calculate the 
effective surface area of the panel that is required. 
(2) 
(ii) Deduce the overall efficiency of the panel for an input power of 
500 Wat an ou tput temperature of 320 K. 
(3) 
(Total 7 marks) 
3. 
(a) The intensity of the Sun's radiation at the position of the Earth is 
approximately 1400 W m-2• 
Suggest why the average power received per unit area of the Earth is 
350Wm-2• 
(2) 

=== PAGE 177 ===
(b) The diagram shows a simplified 
model of the energy balance 
atmosphere TA= 242 K 
of the Earth's surface. It shows 
radiation entering or leaving the 
Earth's surface only. 
The average equilibrium 
temperature of the Earth's 
surface is TE and that of the 
atmosphere is TA = 242 K. 
transmitted through 
atmosphere 245 W m-2 l 
radiated by Eatth's 
surface= a TE4 
·-----------
Earth's surface TE 
(i) Using the data from the diagram, state the emissivity of the atmosphere. (1) 
(ii) Show that the intensity of the radiation radiated by the 
atmosphere toward the Earth's surface is 136 W m-2• 
(1) 
(iii) By reference to the energy balance of the Earth's surface, calculate TE· (2) 
(c) (i) Outline a mechanism by which part of the radiation radiated by the 
Earth's surface is absorbed by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. 
(3) 
(ii) Suggest why the incoming solar radiation is not affected by the 
mechanism you outlined in (c)(i). 
(2) 
(iii) Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas. State one source and 
one sink (object that removes CO2) of this gas. 
(2) 
(Total I 3 marks) 
4. 
(a) State the Stefan-Boltzmann law for a black body. 
(b) The following data relate to the Earth and the Sun. 
Earth-Sun distance 
Radius of Earth 
Radius of Sun 
Surface temperature of Sun 
= 1.5 X lQI I m 
= 6.4 X 106 m 
= 7.Q X 108 m 
= 5800K 
(i) Use the data to show that the power radiated by the Sun is about 
(2) 
4 X 126W. 
(1) 
(ii) Calculate the solar power incident per unit area at a distance from 
the Sun equal to the Earth's distance from the Sun. 
(2) 
(iii) The average power absorbed per unit area at the Earth's surface is 
240Wm-2• 
State two reasons why the value calculated in (b)(ii) differs from 
this value. 
(iv) Show that the value for power absorbed per unit area of 240 W m-2 
is consistent with an average equilibrium temperature for Earth of 
(2) 
about 255 K. 
(2) 
(c) Explain, by reference to the greenhouse effect, why the average 
temperature of the surface of the Earth is greater than 255 K. 
(3) 
(d) Suggest why the burning of fossil fuels may lead to an increase in the 
temperature of the surface of the Earth. 
(3) 
(Total I 5 marks) 
atmosphere 
0.700aT/ 
l 
radiated by 
131 

=== PAGE 178 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.2 
Greenhouse effect 
132 
incom ing 
400Wm-2 
5. 
(a) A white plate has a black pattern on it. 
(i) Explain why, when red hot, the black pattern is brighter than the 
white parts of the plate. 
(2) 
(ii) State which part of the plate has the highest emissivity. 
(1) 
(iii) State which part of the plate has the highest albedo. 
(1) 
(b) There is a scheme to paint the roofs of houses white. Explain how this 
would reduce the enhanced greenhouse effect. 
(3) 
(c) The diagram shows the absorption spectrum for the atmosphere of a 
planet. 
n-:;::::::::::::~::;:;::::=:::;-:::==:::==:::::::::=:::==~1. 
UV 
visible 
IR 
wavelength 
(i) Explain why burning fossil fuels would not cause any change in 
the temperature of the planet. 
(2) 
(ii) Explain why life would not be possible on this planet. 
(2) 
(iii) Water vapor is an effective greenhouse gas. Explain why the 
presence of water vapor in the atmosphere does not necessarily 
lead to global warming. 
(2) 
(Total 13 marks) 
6. A 2 cm diameter metal ball with emissivity 0.8 is heated to 1000 K. 
(a) (i) Calculate the total power of the radiation emitted by the ball. 
(2) 
(ii) Calculate the intensity of the radiation at a distance of 2 m. 
(2) 
(b) A thermal radiation sensor with area of 0.5cm2 is placed 2m from 
the ball. 
(i) Calculate the energy absorbed by the sensor in 1 minute. 
(2) 
(ii) State two assumptions that you have made about the sensor. 
(2) 
(Total 8 marks) 
7. 
In a simple climate model for a planet, the incoming intensity is 400W m-2 
and the radiated intensity is 300W m-2• The temperature of the planet is 
constant. What is the reflected intensity from the planet and the albedo of 
the planet? 
A 
100W m-2 
0.25 
B 
1oowm-2 
0.75 
C 
300W m-2 
0.25 
D 
300W m-2 
0.75 
(Total 1 mark) 

=== PAGE 179 ===
8. What is the main role of carbon dioxide in the greenhouse effect? 
A 
It absorbs incoming radiation from the Sun. 
B 
It absorbs outgoing radiation from the Earth. 
C 
It reflects incoming radiation from the Sun. 
D 
It reflects outgoing radiation from the Earth. 
(Total 1 mark) 
9. The average temperature of the surface of a planet is five times greater than 
the average temperature of the surface of its moon. The emissivities of the 
planet and the moon are the same. The average intensity radiated by the 
planet is/. What is the average intensity radiated by its moon? 
I 
I 
I 
A 
25 
B 
125 
C 
625 
I 
D 
3125 
(Total 1 mark) 
10. The orbital radius of the Earth around the Sun is 1. 5 times that of Venus. 
What is the intensity of solar radiation at the orbital radius ofVenus? 
A 
0.6kwm-2 
c 
2kwm-2 
B 
0.9kwm-2 
D 
3kwm-2 
(Total 1 mark) 
11. A photovoltaic panel of area S has an efficiency of 20%. A second 
photovoltaic panel has an efficiency of 15%. What is the area of the second 
panel so that both panels produce the same power under the same conditions? 
s 
A 
3 
B 
3S 
4 
C 
5S 
4 
D 
4S 
3 
(Total 1 mark) 
12. The three statements give possible reasons why an average value should be 
used for the solar constant. 
I. 
The Sun's output varies during its 11-year cycle. 
II. The Earth is in an elliptical orbit around the Su n. 
III. The plane of the Earth's spin on its axis is tilted to the plane of its orbit 
about the Sun. 
Which are the correct reasons for using an average value for the solar 
constant? 
A 
I and II only 
B 
I and III only 
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III 
(Total 1 mark) 
13. It is suggested that the solar power incident at a point on the Earth's surface 
depends on: 
I. 
daily variations in the Sun's power output 
II. the location of the point 
III. the cloud cover at the point 
Which suggestion(s) is/are correct? 
A 
III only 
B 
I and II only 
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III 
(Total 1 mark) 
133 
