=== PAGE 180 ===
Gas laws 

=== PAGE 181 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B .3 
◄ 
During the study of gas quantities, such as volume, pressure and temperature, it can be helpful to 
remember that we all carry our own gas container at all times: our lungs. Breathing in involves a 
contraction of the diaphragm, which increases the volume of the cavity Air moves in to reduce the 
pressure difference between the atmosphere and that inside. Breathing out involves a relaxation of the 
diaphragm, which reduces the volume and increases the internal pressure so air moves out. The rib 
cage supports the process in both directions using the intercostal muscles. 
Guiding Questions 
How are the macroscopic characteristics of a gas related to the behavior of 
individual molecules? 
What assumptions and observations lead to universal gas laws? 
How can models be used to help explain observed phenomena? 
In the chapters on mechanics, we first defined the quantities associated with particles 
(e.g. mass, momentum and energy), then we looked at how they interact when they 
collide. We are going to follow a similar procedure with gases by first defining the 
relevant quantities (pressure, volume, temperature and number of particles), then 
using those quantities to model interactions between two gases. 
When considering a gas in a container, it is easy to forget that we are actually looking 
at two gases: the gas held within the container and the air that surrounds the container. 
This is made clearer if we consider two gases separated by a shared piston. 
What we want to know is how the gas on one side affects the gas on the other. Which 
way will thermal energy flow and which way will the piston move? 
To answer this, we could look at the mechanical properties of the individual particles 
or the relationships between pressure, volume and temperature. The only problem is 
that there are too many variables, all of which affect the others. We will instead relate 
just two variables at a time, keeping the others constant (for example, pressure is 
inversely proportional to volume if temperature and the number of particles remain 
the same). 
The macroscopic relationships involving pressure, volume, temperature and amount 
of gas discussed in this chapter form the ideal gas laws and can be used in place of the 
microscopic kinetic theory explanations of gas transformations. 
What happens to the pressure of a gas when its volume is reduced? The kinetic theory 
explanation would be that the reduction in volume leads to an increase in density, 
which results in more collisions with the walls per unit time, which increases the total 
rate of change of momentum of particles hitting the walls, leading to a greater force 
over a smaller area and, therefore, a higher pressure. 
Or, using the ideal gas laws, the pressure of a fixed mass of gas is inversely proportional 
to its volume at constant temperature. Reducing the volume will result in a higher 
pressure. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
g 
.. 
B.3 Figure 1 Two chambers 
within a container, separated 
by a piston. 
135 

=== PAGE 182 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
This is a good example 
of how models are used 
in physics. Here we are 
modeling something that 
we cannot see, the atom, 
using a familiar object, a 
perfectly elastic ball. 
B.3 Figure 2 Atoms join to 
► 
make a molecule. 
B.3 Figure 3 To combine 
► 
completely there must be 
equal numbers of atoms. 
136 
Students should understand: 
pressure as given by P = f where Fis the force exerted perpendicular to the surface 
the amount of substance n as given by n = :A 
where N is the number of molecules and NA is 
the Avogadro constant 
ideal gases are described in terms of the kinetic theory and constitute a modeled system used 
to approximate the behavior of real gases 
the ideal gas law equation can be derived from the empirical gas laws for constant pressure, 
constant volume and constant temperature as given by P: = constant 
the equations governing the behavior of ideal gases as given by PV = Nk8 Tand PV = nRT 
the change in momentum of particles due to collisions with a given surface gives rise to 
pressure in gases and, from that analysis, pressure is related to the average translational speed 
of molecules as given by P = ½ pv2 
the relationship between the internal energy U of an ideal monatomic gas and the number of 
molecules or amount of substance as given by U = ½ N k8 Tor U = ½ RnT 
the temperature, pressure and density conditions under which an ideal gas is a good 
approximation of a real gas. 
How do we know atoms have different masses? 
The answer to that question is thanks originally to the chemists, John Dalton in 
particular. Chemists make compounds from elements by mixing them in very precise 
proportions. This is quite complicated but we can consider a simplified version as 
shown in Figure 2. An atom of A joins with an atom of B to form molecule AB. 
We first try by mixing the same masses of A and B but find that when the reaction has 
finished there is some B left over; we must have had too many atoms ofB. lf we reduce 
the amount of B until all the A reacts with all the B to form AB, we know that there must 
have been the same number of atoms of A as there were of Bas shown in Figure 3. We can 
therefore conclude that the mass of an A atom is larger than an atom of B. In fact, the ratio of: 
mass of atom A 
total mass A 
mass of atom B = total mass B 
0 
~ 
0 
~ 
00 
0 
0 
0 +00 ~
+0 
0 + 0 ~ 
0 ®® ~
® 
0 ® ~ 
equal masses of A and B 
equal number of atoms of A and B 
By finding out the ratios of masses in many different reactions, the atomic masses 
of the elements relative to each other were measured. Originally, everything was 
compared to oxygen since it reacts with so many other atoms. Later, when physicists 

=== PAGE 183 ===
started to measure the mass of individual atoms, the standard atom was changed 
to carbon-12. This is taken to have an atomic mass of exactly 12 unified mass units 
(u). The size of 1 u is therefore equal to / 2 of the mass of a carbon-12 atom, which is 
approximately the mass of the smallest atom, hydrogen. 
Avogadro's hypothesis 
The simplified version of chemistry given here does not give the full picture: for one 
thing, atoms do not always join in pairs. Maybe one A joins with two Bs. Without 
knowing the ratio of how many atoms ofB join with one atom of A, we cannot 
calculate the relative masses of the individual atoms. Amedeo Avogadro solved this 
problem by suggesting that equal volumes of all gases at the same temperature and 
pressure will contain the same number of molecules. So if one atom of A and one 
atom of B join to give one molecule AB, then the number of molecules of AB is equal 
to the number of atoms of A or Band the volume of AB = ½(A + B). But if one atom of 
A joins with two atoms of B, then the volume of B atoms is twice the volume of the A 
atoms, and the volume of AB2 = the volume of A. This is illustrated in Figure 4. 
© © 
+ 
® 
® 
~ ~ 
© 
@ 
~ 
© 
© 
© 
+ 
@ 
@ 
® 
® 
® 
® 
~ 
~~ 
The mole and Avogadro's constant 
It can be shown that 12g of carbon-12 contains 6.02 x 1023 atoms. This amount of 
material is called a mole. This number of atoms is called Avogadro's constant (NA) 
(named after him but not calculated by him). If we take 6.02 x 1023 molecules of a 
substance that has molecules that are four times the mass of carbon-12 atoms, it would 
have relative molecular mass of 48. 
The volume of l mole 
of any gas at normal 
atmospheric pressure 
(l 01.3 kPa) and a 
temperature of 0°C 
is 22.4 liters (L), or 
0.0224 m3. 
B.3 Figure 4 Equal volumes 
of gases contain the same 
number of molecules. 
A rough calculation of 
how big a grain of sand 
is compared to volume 
of sand reveals that 
there are approximately 
6 x l 023 (Avogadro's 
constant) grains of sand 
in the Sahara desert. 
◄ Moles of different 
compounds have different 
masses. 
137 

=== PAGE 184 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
Be careful with the 
units. For example, do 
all volume calculations 
using m3. 
138 
6.02 x 1023 molecules of this substance would therefore have a mass four times the 
mass of the same number of carbon-12 atoms, 48 g. So to calculate the mass of a mole 
of any substance, we simply express its relative molecular mass in grams. This gives 
us a convenient way of measuring the amount of substance in terms of the number of 
molecules rather than its mass. 
Worked example 
If a mole of carbon has a mass ofl2g, how many atoms of carbon are there in 2g? 
Solution 
One mole contains 6.02 x 1023 atoms. 
2g is¾ of a mole so contains¾ x 6.02 x 1023 atoms= 1.00 x 1023 atoms 
Worked example 
The density of iron is 7874kg m-3 and the mass of a mole of iron is 55.85 g. What is 
the volume of 1 mole of iron? 
Solution 
Exercise 
mass 
density = 
I 
voume 
mass 
volume= d 
. 
ens1ty 
0.05585 
volume of! mole = 7874 m3 
= 7.093 X 10-6 m 3 
= 7.093cm3 
QI. The mass of 1 mole of copper is 63.54g and its density 8920 kg m-3• 
(a) What is the volume of one mole of copper? 
(b) How many atoms does one mole of copper contain? 
(c) How much volume does one atom of copper occupy? 
Q2. If the density of aluminum is 2700 kg m-3 and the volume of 1 mole is 10cm3, 
what is the mass of one mole of aluminum? 

=== PAGE 185 ===
Nature of Science 
Experiments in the physics lab are sometimes designed to reinforce theory. 
However, real science is not always like that. Theories are of ten developed as a 
result of observation and experiment. Given that gases are made of randomly-
moving tiny particles, it is not difficult to explain their properties. Deducing 
that gases are made of particles from the properties of the gas is a much more 
difficult proposition that will fortunately never have to be done again. 
The gas laws are examples of how we investigate the relationship between two 
variables while controlling all other factors. 
The ideal gas 
Of the three states of matter, the gaseous state has the simplest model. This is because 
the forces between the molecules of a gas are very small, so they are able to move 
freely. We can therefore use information about the motion of particles in A.1, A.2 and 
A.3 sections to study gases in more detail. 
According to our simple model, a gas is made up of a large number of perfectly elastic, 
tiny spheres moving in random motion. 
This model makes some assumptions: 
• 
The collisions between molecules are perfectly elastic. 
• 
The molecules are spheres. 
• 
The molecules are identical. 
• 
There are no forces between the molecules (except when they collide). This means 
that the molecules move with constant velocity between collisions. 
• 
The molecules are very small; that is, their total volume is much smaller than the 
volume of the container. 
Some of these assumptions are not true for all gases, especially when the gas is 
compressed (when the molecules are so close together that they experience a force 
between them). The gas then behaves as a liquid. However, to keep things simple, we 
will only consider gases that behave like our model. We call these gases ideal gases. 
Defining the state of a gas 
To define the state of an amount of matter, we need to give enough information so that 
another person could obtain the same material with the same properties. If we were to 
describe a 100 g cube of copper at 300 K, we have stated how much and how hot it is, 
and even its shape. Someone else would be able to take an identical piece of copper and 
it would behave in the same way as ours. If, on the other hand, we were to take 100g 
of helium gas, then we would also need to define its volume since density can vary 
depending on the container, and different volumes cause the pressure exerted by the 
gas on its sides to vary. 
Volume 
The volume of a gas is simply the volume of the container. If we want to vary the 
volume, we can place the gas in a cylinder with a movable end (a piston) as in Figure 6. 
a- b ~ 
--el 
b? b CY 
... 
B.3 Figure 5 Molecules of 
gas in random motion. 
0 
0 
0 0 0 
0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
... 
B.3 Figure 6 Gas 
molecules trapped in an 
adj ustable container. 
139 

=== PAGE 186 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
8.3 Figure 7 Kinetic energy 
is related to tempera tu re. 
How does a 
consideration of the 
kinetic energy of 
molecules relate to the 
develo pment of the gas 
laws? (A.3) 
8.3 Figure 8 Same 
temperature, different gases. 
140 
Temperature 
Since gas molecules have no forces between them (except when colliding), no work 
is done when they move around, which means that there is no energy associated 
with their position. In other words, the molecules have no potential energy. The 
temperature of a gas in kelvin is therefore directly proportional to the average kinetic 
energy of a molecule. 
3 
Ek. mean = 2 kT 
where k is the Boltzmann constant, 1.38 x 10-23} K-1• 
If there are N molecules then the total kinetic energy of the gas = N x Ek, m ean = {NkT 
A more convenient expression (because we are more often presented with the total 
number of moles than the number of molecules) is Ek, total = {nRT where R is the molar 
gas constant and n is the number of moles. Higher kinetic energy implies higher 
velocity so the molecules of a gas at high temperature will have a higher average 
velocity than molecules of the same gas at a low temperature, as shown in Figure 7. 
0,. 0 f-'().P.~ 
7 
b~c!?-ob 
I 
~ 
I 
J 
~}! 
7 
I 
~ 
J 
low temperature, small average ki11e1ic energy 
high temperature, large average kinetic energy 
Let us compare two gases, A and B, with molecules of different mass at the same 
temperature. Applying Ek, total = ½nRT, we can deduce that if temperature is the same, 
then the average kinetic energy of the molecules will be the same. But Ek = ½ mv2 so: 
1 
2 _ l 
2 
2 mAvA - 2 msvs 
mA vs2 
ms = vA2 
This means that if A has lighter molecules, the molecules in gas A must have higher 
velocity, as represented by the red balls in Figure 8. 
temperature = T 
temperature = T 
~}! 
7 
I 
I 
J 
Q O ~p_f-() 
7 
b~op~0 
I 
-
J 
low mass molecules, high velocity 
high mass molecules, low velocity 
I 
I 

=== PAGE 187 ===
Pressure 
Pressure at a surface is defined as the force per unit area, where the force acts 
perpendicular to the surface: 
p = £. 
A 
Pressure is measured in pascals (Pa), where I Pa is equivalent to IN m-2. 
When gas molecules collide with the sides of the container, their momentum changes. 
This is because they have experienced an unbalanced force from the wall. According 
to Newton's third law, the wall must experience an equal and opposite force so will 
be pushed out by the gas. This is why the piston must be held in place by the man 
in Figure 9. The collective force from all collisions between particles and the walls is 
responsible for the pressure a gas exerts on its container. 
To understand how the pressure is related to the motion of the molecules, we can 
consider the simplified version shown in Figure 10 where one molecule is bouncing 
rapidly between the piston and the far wall of the cylinder. 
m 
7 
0 
V 
► 
I 
I 
J 
- ---- L 
When the molecule hits the piston, it bounces off elastically. The magnitude of change 
in momentum is therefore 2mv. The force exerted on the piston is equal to the rate of 
change of momentum, which in this case is the change in momentum x rate of hitting 
the wall. The rate at which the molecule hits the wall depends on how long it takes for 
the molecule to travel to the other end of the cylinder and back: 
2L 
time for molecule to travel to other end and back = -
V 
l 
V 
number of hits per unit time = (lvL) = lL 
v 
mv1 
force on wall = rate of change of momentum = 2mv x lL = T 
mv2 
Since pressure is force per unit area, Ppiston = Al , where A is the surface area of the piston. 
Because density is mass per unit volume, Ppiston = pv2, this allows us to scale up this 
derivation to containers with more than one molecule. So far, we have only considered 
the forces acting on the piston. To relate the overall pressure across the entire container 
to the average speed of the molecules, we must account for three dimensions and not 
just one: 
B.3 Figure 9 Gas pushes 
the piston to the right, so 
something must push it to 
the left. 
B.3 Figure 10 One 
molecule of gas 
141 

=== PAGE 188 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
How can gas particles 
with high kinetic energy 
be used to perform 
work? (A.3) 
When you make 
changes to the state 
of a gas, all three 
quantities will change 
unless one is kept 
constant. This is a rather 
artificial condition but 
makes modeling the gas 
easier. 
Keeping the 
temperature constant is 
quite difficult because 
when you push in the 
piston, you do work 
on the gas, increasing 
the kinetic energy of 
the molecules and 
hence increasing the 
temperature. If the 
compression is slow, 
then the temperature 
will have time to return 
to the tern perature of 
the surroundings. 
B.3 Figure 12 Reducing 
the volume increases the 
pressure. 
A worksheet with ful I 
details of how to carry 
out this experiment is 
available in the eBook. 
142 
• 
So the pressure is directly related to the square of the average speed of the particles and 
therefore the temperature of the gas. 
The force exerted by the gas on the 
piston would cause the piston to 
move outward unless there was a 
force opposing it. In the lab, this 
force is normally provided by the 
air on the outside, which is also 
made of molecules in random 
motion as shown in Figure 11. 
B.3 Figure 11 Piston pushed by trapped gas on one 
side and air on the other. 
Relationships between P, V, Tand n 
When dealing with relationships, we generally are concerned with two quantities, e.g. 
distance and time, force and area, mass and volume. Here we have four variables, each 
depending on each other. To make life easier, we can keep two constant and look at the 
relationships between pressure and volume, pressure and temperature, and volume and 
temperature. This will give three different relationships that are known as the gas laws. 
The Boyle-Mariotte law (constant temperature and 
number of moles) 
The Boyle-Mariotte law states that the pressure of a fixed mass of gas at constant temperature is 
inverse!,- proportional to its volume. 
1 
P0< V 
As the volume of a gas is reduced, the gas will become more dense, because the 
molecules are pushed together. The molecules will therefore hit the walls more often, 
increasing the rate of change of momentum (while the area of the walls decreases) and 
hence the pressure as shown in Figure 12. 
The easiest way to test the relationship between pressure and volume is to compress a gas in a 
syringe that is connected via some rubber tubing to a pressure sensor as in Figure 13. The range 
of pressure will be limited to how much force you can apply but should be enough to show the 
relationship. 
ga..~ syringe 
.... 
-
B.3 Figure 13 Apparatus to measure P and V 
Boyle-Mariotte law apparatus. ► 

=== PAGE 189 ===
Graphical representation of the Boyle-Mariotte law 
Since the pressure of a fixed mass of gas at constant temperature is inversely 
proportional to its volume, a graph of pressure against volume will be a curve as 
shown in Figure 14. 
If the experiment was now repeated 
P 
with the same amount of gas at different 
temperatures, the set of blue lines 
shown in Figure 15 would be achieved. 
Each line is called an isotherm. The 
effect of increasing the temperature of 
a fixed volume of gas is to increase the 
pressure so we can see that the curves 
further away from the origin are for 
higher temperatures. The orange lines 
on the graph represent the following gas 
transformations: 
IJ 
constant temperature (isothermal) 
JK constant pressure (isobaric) 
KL constant volume (isovolumetric) 
We can describe each isotherm (at a constant number of moles) with the equation: 
V 
P1V1 = P2V2• This is a simple rewriting of the inverse proportion relationship above, but 
can be a more direct way to solve problems with just these two variables. 
Gay-Lussac's law (constant volume and number 
of moles) 
Gay-Lussac's law states that the pressure of a fixed mass of gas with constant volume is directly 
proportional to its temperature in kelvin. 
p oc. T 
As the temperature of a gas is increased, the average kinetic energy of the molecules 
increases. The change in momentum as the molecules hit the walls is therefore greater 
and they hit the walls more often as shown in Figure 16. According to Newton's 
second law, the force exerted = rate of change of momentum, so the force on the walls 
increases and hence the pressure increases. 
0,. 0 ~.P.~ 
7 
b~O? .-ob 
I 
.I 
J 
11~11 
f>-----------' 
increased temperature 
➔ increased kinetic energy 
-> 
increased pressure 
p 
0 4------====:.-
o 
V 
... 
B.3 Figure 14 Graph of P 
vs VA straight line through 
the origin would be seen 
if, instead, P was plotted 
. 
1 
against i7 
B.3 Figure 15 P vs V for 
different T. 
W hen a gas is 
compressed, work is 
done on it. Work done 
= force x distance, 
which is the area 
under the P-V graph. 
This makes this graph 
particularly useful 
when investigating the 
energy changes that a 
gas undergoes when 
transformed. 
B.3 Figure 16 Pressure 
increases with temperature. 
143 

=== PAGE 190 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
... 
B.3 Figure 18 Graph of 
p vs T. 
144 
--
... 
Gay-Lussac's law apparatus. 
Lherrnometer 
pressure gauge 
water 
gas 
... 
B.3 Figure 17 Apparatus to measure P and T. 
A pressure sensor can be used in an experiment to show the relationship between pressure 
and temperature. A flask of fixed volume is placed in a water bath as shown in Figure 17. A 
temperature sensor measures the temperature of the gas while a pressure sensor measures its 
pressure The temperature of the gas is changed by heating the water, and the pressure and 
temperature are recorded simultaneously. 
Graphical representation of Gay-Lussac's law 
Since pressure is proportional to temperature, a graph of pressure vs temperature for a 
fixed mass of gas at constant volume will be a straight line as shown in Figure 18. 
... 
B.3 Figure 19 P vs T for different V 
If the experiment was repeated with 
different volumes of the same amount 
of gas, then the set of lines shown in 
Figure 19 would be achieved, each 
line representing a different volume. 
Increasing the volume at constant 
temperature (line CD) will make the 
pressure lower so the less steep lines are 
for larger volumes. The orange lines on 
the graph represent the following gas 
transformations: 
AB 
constant volume (isovolumetric) 
BC 
constant pressure (isobaric) 
CD 
constant temperature (isothermal). 
We can describe each isovolume (at a constant number of moles) with the equation: 
P1T2 = P2T1• This is equivalent to the proportional relationship above. 
Charles' law (constant pressure) 
Charles' law states that the volume of a fixed mass of gas at a constant pressure is directly 
proportional to its temperature in kelvin. 
VcxT 

=== PAGE 191 ===
As the temperature of a gas is increased, the molecules move faster, causing an increase 
in pressure. However, if the volume is increased in proportion to the increase in 
temperature, the pressure will remain the same. This is shown in Figure 20. 
increa~ed temperature 
--> 
increased kinetic energy 
--> 
increa~ed pressure 
--> 
increased volume reduces pressure to original 
To test the relationship between volume and 
thermometer 
temperature, you need a narrow tube with 
the top end open and a small amount of 
ruler 
liquid that traps a sample of dry air, as 
shown in Figure 21. Traditionally, 
concentrated sulfuric acid was used to trap 
the air because it absorbs water. However, 
th is might be against the safety regulations 
in your country. If so, oil will do the job but 
liquid to 
might not give such good results. The 
trap air 
temperature of the sample of air is changed 
by placing it in a water bath which is heated. 
The temperature of the gas is then assumed 
to be the same as the tern perature of the 
water 
water, which is measured using a 
thermometer. If we assume the tube has a 
uniform cross-section then, as the 
temperature is changed, the volume is 
measured by measuring the length of the 
cylinder of gas. At the start of the 
air 
experiment, the pressure of the gas = the 
heat---
pressure of the surrounding air. As the 
temperature increases. the pressure also increases, pushing the bead up the tube increasing 
the volume, causing the pressure to reduce until it is again equal to the pressure of the 
surrounding air. We therefore assume the gas pressure is constant. 
Graphical representation of Charles' law 
Since volume is proportional to temperature, a graph of volume vs temperature for a 
fixed mass of gas at constant pressure will be a straight line as shown in Figure 22. 
T 
... 
B.3 Figure 20 Constant 
pressure expansion. 
The liquid will add a 
little bit to the pressure 
B.3 Figure 21 Apparatus to 
measure T and (indirectly) V. 
How does the concept 
of force and momentum 
link mechanics and 
thermodynamics? (A.2) 
B.3 Figure 22 Graph of 
Vvs T 
145 

=== PAGE 192 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
8.3 Figure 24 P. V and Tin 
three dimensions. 
146 
If the experiment was repeated with the 
gas at different constant pressures, then 
the set oflines shown in Figure 23 would 
be achieved, each line representing a 
different pressure. Reducing the volume 
at a constant temperature (line GH) will 
result in a higher pressure so the less 
steep lines have higher pressure. The 
orange lines on the graph represent the 
following gas transformations: 
EF 
constant pressure (isobaric) 
FG 
constant volume (isovolumetric) 
GH 
constant temperature (isothermal). .. 
8.3 Figure 23 V vs T for different P. 
We can describe each isobar (at a constant number of moles) with the equation: 
V1T2 = V2T1• 
The ideal gas equation 
The relationship between pressure, volume and temperature can be expressed in one 
equation: 
PV = nRT 
where n = the number of moles of gas and R = the molar gas constant (8.31 J mo1-1 K-1) . 
This can also be written as PV = Nk8T where N is the number of molecules and k8 is the 
Boltzmann constant. These equations are used to determine one of the four variables 
from the other three at a given instant. 
When working with a changing container of gas ('before and after'), we can say that 
P1V1T2n2 = P2V2T1n1 (and simply cancel any quantities that remain constant). 
Graphical representation of the ideal gas equation 
This relationship can be represented on a graph with three axes as in Figure 24. The 
shaded area represents all the possible states of a fixed mass of gas. No matter what you 
do to the gas, its P, V, and Twill always be on this surface for a given number of moles. 
This is quite difficult to draw so the two-dimensional views shown before are used 
instead. 
p 
V 

=== PAGE 193 ===
Worked example 
The pressure of a gas inside a cylinder is 300 kPa. If the gas is compressed to half its 
original volume and the temperature rises from 27 •c to 327 •c, what will its new 
pressure be? 
Solution 
Using the ideal gas equation: 
PV = nRT 
PV 
Rearranging: 
T = constant 
PV 
PV 
So: 
Tat the beginning =rat the end 
Equating: 
Exercise 
PV 
300000 x V 
Tat the beginning = 
300 
V 
PV 
Px 2 
Tat the end = 600 
V 
V 
Px2 
300 000 X 300 = 600 
2 
P= 300000 x 600 x -300 
P= 1200kPa 
Q3. The pressure of 10 m 3 of gas in a sealed container at 300 K is 250 kPa. If the 
temperature of the gas is changed to 350K, what will the pressure be? 
Q4. A container of volume 2 m 3 contains 5 moles of gas. If the temperature of the 
gas is 293K: 
(a) what is the pressure exerted by the gas? 
(b) what is the new pressure if half the gas leaks out? 
Q5. A piston contains 250cm3 of gas at 300 Kand a pressure of 150 kPa. The gas 
expands, causing the pressure to go down to l OOkPa and the temperature 
drops to 250 K. What is the new volume? 
Q6. A sample of gas trapped in a piston is heated and compressed at the same 
time. This results in a doubling of temperature and a halving of the volume. If 
the initial pressure was 100 kPa, what will the final pressure be? 
Challenge yourself 
1. Two identical flasks, each full of air, are connected by a thin tube on a day when 
the temperature is 300 Kand the atmospheric pressure 100 kPa. One of the 
flasks is then heated to 400 K while the other one is kept at 300 K. What is the 
new pressure in the flasks? 
Temperatures must 
be changed to kelvin 
because we are 
working with absolute 
values rather than 
changes. 
147 

=== PAGE 194 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
U = {nRT is only true 
for monatomic gases 
such as helium, neon 
and argon 
148 
Internal energy of a gas (U) 
We think of an ideal gas as being made of a large number of perfectly elastic spheres 
moving in random motion. When the molecules collide, momentum and energy are 
conserved, but between collisions, there is no force acting between them. This means 
that no work needs to be done to change the position of a molecule. The molecules 
therefore have no potential energy. The total kinetic energy of all the molecules is 
called the internal energy of the gas. 
Challenge yourself 
2. Try to derive these relationships between kinetic energy and temperature by 
combining the pressure-velocity relationship and ideal gas law described 
previously in this chapter. 
We know that the average kinetic energy of the molecules of a gas is proportional to 
the temperature in kelvin. 
3 
Ek, mean of a molecule = 2kT 
where k = Boltzmann's constant= 1.38 x 10-23 J K-1. 
A mole of gas contains NA (Avogadro's constant) molecules so the Ek, ,oral = fNAkT. 
NAk is also a constant, the universal gas constant= 8.31 J moJ-1 K-1• 
So, the total kinetic energy of one mole of gas "'f RT. 
Since the internal energy of a gas is the total kinetic energy, then for n moles we can say: 
internal energy, U = fnRT 
When heat is transferred to a fixed volume of gas, it will increase the internal energy and 
hence the temperature of the gas. If no heat is lost, we can say that: 
Q = .6.U 
Worked example 
500 J of thermal energy are transferred to 2g of helium gas kept at constant volume 
in a cylinder. Calculate the temperature rise of the gas. 
Solution 
The molar mass of helium is. 4 g son= 0.5. 
increase in internal energy = fnR.6. T = thermal energy added = 500 J 
2 X 500 
.6.T= 3 x 0.5 x 8.31 = SOK 
Exercise 
Q7. Calculate the internal energy of 100 g of argon (nucleon number 40) at 300 K. 
Q8. Calculate the average kinetic energy of atoms of helium at 400 K. 

=== PAGE 195 ===
Real gases 
The assumptions we made when developing the model for an ideal gas do not fully 
apply to real gases except when the pressure is low and the temperature high. At high 
pressures and densities, the molecules can be close together so the assumption that 
the volume of the molecules is negligible does not apply, nor does the assumption 
about there being no forces between the molecules. \Vhat can also happen at low 
temperatures is the gas can change into a liquid which, for obvious reasons, does 
not behave like a gas. However, although no gas behaves exactly as an ideal gas, air at 
normal room temperature and pressure comes pretty close, as experiments show. 
Guiding Questions revisited 
How are the macroscopic characteristics of a gas related to the behavior of 
individual molecules? 
\Vhat assumptions and observations lead to universal gas laws? 
How can models be used to help explain observed phenomena? 
In this chapter, we have combined the macroscopic properties of a gas in a container 
with a microscopic understanding of kinetic theory to explain that: 
• Pressure (the force per unit area at a surface) is increased when the average 
speed of particles increases and/or the total container surface area decreases. 
• Real gases at low pressures and densities and high temperatures can be modeled 
as ideal gases, for which certain assumptions in kinetic theory apply. 
• The Boyle-Mariotte law states that pressure and volume are inversely 
proportional for a constant temperature and number of moles of gas. 
What other simplified 
models are relied 
upon to communicate 
the understanding of 
complex phenomena? 
(NOS) 
Nitrogen becomes a liquid at 
low temperatures. 
149 

=== PAGE 196 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
150 
• Gay-Lussac's law states that pressure and absolute temperature are proportional 
for a constant volume and number of moles of gas. 
• Charles' law states that volume and absolute temperature are proportional for a 
constant pressure and number of moles of gas. 
• The ideal gas law is comprised of three empirical relationships and relates 
pressure, volume, absolute temperature and number of moles. 
• The internal energy of an ideal gas is related to the kinetic energy, but not to the 
potential energy, of particles in a gas and therefore to the temperature of the gas. 
Practice questions 
1. A hot air balloon works. because the density of hot air is less than the 
surrounding cold air. 
(a) The volume of a hot air baIJoon is 2500 m3 and its mass is 250 kg 
(without passengers). The temperature of the air in the balloon is 100 °C. 
Density of air at 20 °C = 1.21 kg m-3 
Average relative molecular mass of air = 29 g moJ-1 
(i) Calculate the volume of 1 kg of at 20 °C. 
(2) 
(ii) Calculate the volume of 1 kg of air at 100 °C and hence show that 
the density of air at 100 °C is 0.95 kg m-3. 
(3) 
(iii) Calculate the mass of hot air in the balloon. 
(1) 
(iv) Calculate the mass of cold air displaced by the balloon. 
(1) 
(v) Determine whether the balloon will leave the ground or not. 
(2) 
(b) (i) Calculate the average velocity of air molecules in the balloon 
(assume the molecules behave as spheres). 
(2) 
(ii) Calculate the number of moles in the balloon. 
(2) 
(iii) Calculate the internal energy contained by the hot gas. 
(2) 
(rota! 15 marks) 
2. (a) The atoms or molecules of an ideal gas are assumed to be identical 
hard elastic spheres that have negligible volume compared with the 
volume of the containing vessel. 
(i) State two further assumptions of the kinetic theory of an ideal gas. (2) 
(ii) Suggest why only the average kinetic energy of the molecules of 
an ideal gas is related to the internal energy of the gas. 
(3) 
cyHndff=t 
ideal gas 
(b) An ideal gas is contained in a cylinder by means of a frictionless piston. 
At temperature 290 Kand pressure 4.8 x 105 Pa, the gas has volume 
9.2 X 10-4 1113_ 
(i) Calculate the number of moles of the gas. 
(2) 

=== PAGE 197 ===
(ii) The gas is compressed isothermally to a volume of2.3 x 10-4 1113. 
Determine the pressure P of the gas. 
(2) 
(iii) The gas is now heated at constant volume to a temperature of 420 
K. Show that the pressure of the gas is now 2.8 x 106 Pa. 
(1) 
(c) Sketch a pressure-volume (P-V) diagram for the changes in (b)(ii) and 
(b)(iii). 
(3) 
(Total 13 marks) 
3. The equipment shown in the diagram was used by a student to investigate 
the variation with volume, of the pressure p of air, at constant temperature. 
The air was trapped in a tube of constant cross-sectional area above a 
column of oil. The pump forces oil to move up the tube, decreasing the 
volume of the trapped air. 
air 
H 
oil 
scale 
pressure 
gauge 
valve 
'-=~==: ::i:::l:=-► to air pump 
(a) The student measured the height Hof the air column and the 
corresponding air pressure p. After each reduction in the volume, the 
student waited for some time before measuring the pressure. Outline 
why this was necessary. 
(1) 
(b) The following graph of p versus jj was obtained. Error bars were 
negligibly small. Error bars were negligibly small. The equation of 
the line of best fit is p = a + ~- Determine the value of b including an 
appropriate unit. 
(3) 
~ 4 
0 
... 3 
;:;:; 
2 
0 -t----,----,----,----,----r---, 
0 
2 
3 
4 
(c) Outline how the results of this experiment are consistent with the ideal 
gas law at constant temperature. 
(2) 
151 

=== PAGE 198 ===
THE PARTICULATE NATURE OF MATTER B.3 
Gas laws 
152 
(d) The cross-sectional area of the tube is 1.3 x 10-3 m2 and the 
temperature of air is 300 K. Estimate the number of moles of air in the 
rub~ 
~) 
(e) The equation in (b) may be used to predict the pressure of the air at 
extremely large values of 17. Suggest why this will be an unreliable 
estimate of the pressure. 
(2) 
(rota! 10 marks) 
4. Which aspect of thermal physics is best explained by the molecular kinetic 
model? 
A 
The equation of state of ideal gases 
B 
The difference between Celsius and kelvin temperature 
C 
The value of the Avogadro constant 
D 
The existence of gaseous isotopes 
(rota! 1 mark) 
5. A quantity of 2.00 mol of an ideal gas is maintained at a temperature of 
127 °Cina container of volume 0.083 m 3• What is the pressure of the gas? 
A 
8kPa 
B 
25kPa 
C 
40kPa 
D 
80kPa 
(rota! 1 mark) 
6. Two ideal gases, X and Y, are at the same temperature. The mass of a 
particle of gas X is larger than the mass of a particle of gas Y. Which is 
correct about the average kinetic energy and the average speed of the 
particles in gases X and Y? 
A 
larger for Y 
larger for Y 
B 
same 
larger for Y 
C 
same 
same 
D 
larger for Y 
same 
(rota! 1 mark) 
7. A substance in the gas state has a density about 1000 times less than when 
it is in the liquid state. The diameter of a molecule is d. Which is the best 
estimate of the average distance between molecules in the gas state? 
A 
d 
B 
10d 
C 
100d 
D 
1000d 
(rota! 1 mark) 
8. 
An ideal gas and a solid of the same substance are at the same temperature. 
The average kinetic energy of the gas molecules is Es and the average 
kinetic energy of the solid molecules is E, What is the comparison between 
E and E? 
g 
s 
A 
E is less than E 
g 
!i 
B 
E equals£ 
g 
s 

=== PAGE 199 ===
C 
Eg is greater than E, 
D 
The relationship between Eg and E, cannot be determined 
(Total 1 mark) 
9. Two flasks, P and Q, contain an ideal gas and are connected with a tube 
of negligible volume compared to that of the flasks . The volume of Pis 
twice the volume of Q. Pis held at a temperature of 200 Kand Q is held at a 
f 
h . 
. 
f mass of )?as in P 
temperature o 400 K. W at 1s ratio o 
f 
. Q? 
masso gasm 
l 
A 
8 
B 
p 
l 
4 
C 
4 
D 
8 
(Total 1 mark) 
10. Q and Rare two rigid containers of volumes 3V and V respectively, 
containing molecules of the same ideal gas initially at the same 
temperature. The gas pressures in Q and Rare p and 3p respectively. The 
containers are connected through a valve of negligible volume that is 
initially closed. The valve is opened in such a way that the temperature of 
the gases does not change. What is the change of pressure in Q? 
Q 
R 
II 
3V 
~ 
V 
II 
valve 
A 
+p 
B 
+p 
C 
- p 
D 
- p 
2 
2 
(Total 1 mark) 
11. (a) A closed box of fixed volume 0.15 m 3 contains 3.0mol of an ideal 
monatomic gas. The temperature of the gas is 290 K. Calculate the 
pressure of the gas. 
(1) 
(b) When the gas is supplied with 0.86 kJ of energy, its temperature 
increases by 23 K. The specific heat capacity of the gas is 3.1 kJ kg-• K-1• 
Calculate, in kg, the mass of the gas. 
(1) 
(c) Calculate the average kinetic energy of the particles of the gas. 
(1) 
(d) Explain, with reference to the kinetic model of an ideal gas, how an 
increase in temperature of the gas leads to an increase in pressure. 
(3) 
(Total 6 marks) 
153 
