=== PAGE 304 ===
Doppler effect 

=== PAGE 305 ===
◄ 
The Hubble Deep Field is an image of a small section of the night sky captured by the Hubble Space 
Telescope over 100 hours in 1995. Most of the bright objects cap tu red are galaxies (some of them are 
among the most distant ever known) and the light from many of these galaxies is red-shifted. A red 
shift of electromagnetic radiation is an increase in the wavelength of the light and is evidence for the 
expansion of the Universe. For sound waves, we refer to this change in the observed wavelength as the 
Doppler effect. 
Guiding Questions 
How can the Doppler effect be explained qualitatively and quantitatively? 
What are some practical applications of the Doppler effect? 
Why are there differences when applying the Doppler effect to different types 
of wave? 
The Doppler effect is the change in frequency of a wave due to the relative motion of 
source and observer. It can be observed in both light and sound but the reason for the 
shift is quite different. 
When sound is involved, there is a reference frame that we can measure the velocity of 
sound relative to - the air. If the source or observer are not moving relative to the air, 
then they are not moving. 
Light does not need a medium so there is no difference between moving source or 
observer. The shift in frequency is due to relativistic effects rather than a change in 
wave velocity. For light, it makes no difference if you take the source or the observer to 
be the one that is moving; it is their velocity relative to each other that is important. 
Students should understand: 
the nature of the Doppler effect for sound waves and electromagnetic waves 
the representation of the Doppler effect in terms of wavefront diagrams when either the 
source or the observer is moving 
the relative change in frequency or wavelength observed for a light wave due to the Doppler 
effect where the speed oflight is much larger than the relative speed between the source and 
. 
8f 
~A 
v 
the observer as given by 7 = 2 :::: c 
shifts in spectral lines provide information about the motion of bodies like stars and galaxies 
in space. 
WAVE BEHAVIOR C .5 
• • 
What are the similarities 
and differences between 
light and sound waves 
(C.2)? 
259 

=== PAGE 306 ===
WAVE BEHAVIOR C.5 
C.5 Figure 1 The car starts 
► 
from the red spot and moves 
forward. The largest circle is 
the wavefront formed when 
the car began. 
In this course, we often 
explain phenomena 
that you have observed 
such as the change 
in frequency as an 
ambulance drives past. 
What if you have never 
observed such a thing? 
C.5 Figure 2 The 
wavelength of the sound is 
constant because the source 
is stationary. 
If the source moves at 
the speed of sound. the 
sound in front bunches 
up to form a shock 
wave. This causes the 
bang (sonic boom) 
you hear when a plane 
breaks the sound barrier. 
260 
Doppler effect 
The Doppler effect 
If you have ever stood next to a busy road, or even better a race track, you might 
have noticed that the cars sound different when they come toward you and when 
they go away. It is difficult to put this into words but the sound is something like this: 
'eeeeeeeeeeeoowwwwwwww'. The sound on approach is a higher frequency than 
on retreat. This effect is called the Doppler effect and can occur when the source of 
the sound is moving or when the observer is moving, or when both the source and 
observer are moving. 
C 
C 
2 
Moving source 
The change in frequency caused when a source moves is due to the change in 
wavelength in front of and behind the source. This is illustrated in Figure 1. You can 
see that the waves ahead of the source have been squashed as the source 'catches up' 
with them. The velocity of sound is not affected by the movement of the source, so the 
reduction in wavelength results in an increased frequency (since v = j}..). 
Moving observer 
If the observer moves relative to a stationary source, the change in frequency observed 
is due to the fact that the velocity of the sound changes relative to the observer. This 
is because the velocity of sound is relative to the air, so if you travel through the air 
toward a sound, the velocity of the sound will increase. Figure 2 illustrates the effect on 
frequency of a moving observer. 
V 
C 
C 
V 
~ 
~ 
NH8~ 
car I 
car2 

=== PAGE 307 ===
The Doppler effect and electromagnetic radiation 
The Doppler effect also applies to electromagnetic radiation (radio waves, microwaves 
and light). The derivation of the formula is rather more complicated since the velocity 
oflight is not changed by the relative movement of the observer. However, if the 
relative velocities are much smaller than the speed of light, we can use the following 
approximation: 
Where: 
Red shift 
V 
N= -fo 
C 
t-.f = the change in frequency 
v = the relative speed of the source and observer 
c = the speed of light in a vacuum 
Jo= the original frequency. 
If a source of light is moving away from an observer, the light received by the observer 
will have a longer wavelength than when it was emitted. If we look at the spectrum as 
shown in Figure 3, we see that the red end of the spectrum is long wavelength and the 
blue end is short wavelength. The change in wavelength will therefore cause the light 
to shift toward the red end of the spectrum - this is called red shift. This effect is very 
useful to astronomers as they can use it to calculate how fast stars are moving away 
from us. This is made possible by the fact that the spectrum oflight from stars contains 
characteristic absorption lines from elements such as hydrogen. The wavelength of these 
lines is known so their shifted position in the spectrum can be used to calculate velocity. 
Short wavelength 
Long wavelength 
Full visible light spectrum 
Hydrogen spectrum 
Hydrogen spectrum from a receding star (red-shifted) 
The rate at which 
blood flows can be 
found by measuring 
the Doppler shift of 
ultrasound waves 
reflected off blood 
cells. In this case, the 
blood cell is moving 
relative to the source, 
and when it reflects 
the wave, the reflected 
wave is moving relative 
to the receiver. This 
causes a double shift in 
frequency. 
How can the use of the 
Doppler effect for light 
be used to calculate 
speed? (NOS) 
Unlike the Doppler 
effect for sound, it does 
not matter whether it is 
the source or observer 
that moves. 
C.5 Figure 3 Comparing 
the spectrum of hydrogen 
from a stationary source and 
a star. 
261 

=== PAGE 308 ===
WAVE BEHAVIOR C.5 
Speed cameras use the 
Doppler effect. 
262 
► 
Doppler effect 
Example: Radars 
Police speed traps use the Doppler effect to measure the speed of passing cars. When 
they aim the device at the car, a beam of electromagnetic radiation (radio waves, 
microwaves or infrared) is reflected off the car. The reflected beam undergoes a double 
Doppler shift. First the car is approaching the beam so there will be a shift due to the 
moving observer, and second the reflected beam is emitted from the moving source. 
When the device receives the higher frequency reflected beam, the speed of the car can 
be calculated from the change in frequency. 
Worked example 
A speed trap uses a beam with a wavelength 1.0cm. What is the change in 
frequency received by the detector if the beam reflects off a car traveling at 
150kmh-1? 
Solution 
First convert the car's speed tom s- 1: 
150kmh-1 = 42ms-1 
C 
3.00 X 108 
frequency of the 1.0cm wave=;.= 1.0 x 10_2 = 3.0 x lQIOHz 
Change inf of signal received by car is given by: 
V 
t..f= -Jo 
42 
3_00 x 108 x 3.0 x 10w = 4.2 x 103 Hz 
This shift is then doubled since the car, now the source of the reflected wave, is 
traveling toward the detector, so the change in frequency= 8.4 x 103 Hz. 
Exercise 
QI. A star emits light of wavelength 650 nm. If the light received at the Earth 
from this star has a wavelength of 690 nm, how fast is the star moving away 
from the Earth? 
Q2. An atom of hydrogen traveling toward the Earth at 2 x 106ms-1 emits light 
of wavelength 658 nm. What is the change in wavelength experienced by an 
observer on the Earth? 

=== PAGE 309 ===
The expanding Universe 
In the early 1920s, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, and while 
Einstein and Friedmann were developing their theories, Vesto Slipher and Edwin 
Hubble were taking measurements. Slipher was measuring the line spectra from 
distant galaxies and Hubble was measuring how far away they were. Slipher discovered 
that the spectral lines from all the galaxies were shifted toward the red end of the 
spectrum. If this was due to the Doppler shift, it would imply that all of the galaxies 
were moving away from the Earth. Given the change in wavelength, Hubble then 
calculated the velocity of the galaxies using the Doppler formula: 
Where: 
v = the recessional velocity 
c = the speed oflight 
~ ,l = the change in wavelength 
V 
!).),., 
- = -
= z 
C 
"'-em 
,lem = the wavelength originally emitted from the galaxy 
z = the fractional increase or z parameter (no units). 
Exercise 
Q3. A spectral line from a distant galaxy of wavelength 434.0nm is red-shifted to 
479.8 nm. Calculate the recession speed of the galaxy. 
Q4. The same line from a second galaxy is shifted to 481.0 nm. Calculate its 
recession speed. Is this galaxy closer or further away? 
Hubble's law 
In 1929, Hubble published his 
discovery that there appeared to be 
a linear relationship between the 
recessional velocity and distance to 
the galaxy. This can be illustrated 
by plotting the data on a graph as 
shown in Figure 4. 
The recessional velocity of a distant 
galaxy is directly proportional to its 
distance. 
In other words, the further away a 
galaxy is, the faster it moves away 
from us. 
' ti) f 
10000 
.s 
~ 8000 
6000 
4000 
2000 
20 40 
60 80 100 120 140 
distance/Mpc 
What gives rise to 
emission spectra and 
how can they be used to 
determine astronomical 
distances? (E.l ) 
C.5 Figure 4 Graph of 
recession speed of galaxies 
against their distance from 
the Earth. 
263 

=== PAGE 310 ===
WAVE BEHAVIOR C.5 
264 
Doppler effect 
This can be expressed in terms of the formula: 
V (X d 
Or: 
v= Had 
where Ha is the Hubble constant. This is the gradient of the line and has the value 
72 km s- 1 Mpc1• This gives a measure of the rate of expansion of the Universe. This is 
probably not a constant rate since the effect of gravity might slow down the rate over 
time. Ha is the current value. 
Exercise 
Q5. Use Hubble's law to estimate the distance from the Earth to a galaxy with a 
recessional velocity of 150 km s-1• 
Q6. If a galaxy is 20 Mpc from Earth, how fast will it be receding? 
Guiding Questions revisited 
How can the Doppler effect be explained qualitatively and quantitatively? 
What are some practical applications of the Doppler effect? 
Why are there differences when applying the Doppler effect to different types 
of wave? 
In this chapter, we have studied the interactions between the velocity of a wave and the 
velocities of its source and observer to appreciate how: 
• The motion of a source of a wave causes the wavelength of the wave to decrease 
in front and increase behind, which means that an increased frequency is 
observed for an approaching source and a decreased frequency is observed for a 
receding source. 
• The same qualitative effects are observed when an observer approaches a wave 
source (increased observed frequency) and recedes from the source (decreased 
observed frequency), although, in this case, the emitted wavelengths are 
constant throughout. 
• This 'Doppler effect' is useful in medicine (to examine circulation), transport 
(radar for speed measurements) and cosmology (motion of galaxies relative to 
the Earth). 
• When the wave speed is much higher than the relative speed of the source and 
observer (e.g. light), the ratio of the change in the observed frequency to the 
frequency at source is approximately equal to the ratio of the velocity of the 
source to the speed of the wave. 

=== PAGE 311 ===
Practice questions 
I. The diagram on the right shows wavefronts produced by a stationary wave 
source S. The spacing of the wavefronts is equal to the wavelength of the 
waves. The wavefronts travel with speed v. 
(a) The source S now moves to the right with speed v. Copy the diagram and 
draw four successive wavefronts to show the pattern of waves produced 
by the moving source. 
(3) 
The Sun rotates about its center. The light from one edge of the Sun, as seen 
by a stationary observer, shows a Doppler shift of 0.004 nm for light of 
wavelength 600.000 nm. 
(b) Assuming that the Doppler equation for sound may be used for light, 
estimate the linear speed of a point on the surface of the Sun due to its 
rotation. 
(3) 
(Total 6 marks) 
2. 
A source emits sound of wavelength /40 and wave speed v0• A stationary 
observer hears the sound as the source moves away. What are the wavelength 
of the sound and the wave speed of the sound as measured by the stationary 
observer? 
A 
less than Ao 
equal to v0 
B 
greater than Ao 
equal to v0 
C 
less than Ao 
less than v0 
D 
greater than Ao 
less than v0 
(Total 1 mark) 
3. A train approaches a station and sounds a horn of constant frequency and 
constant intensity. An observer waiting at the station detects a frequency f obs 
and an intensity lobs· What are the changes, if any, in lobs and f obs as the train 
slows down? 
A 
no change 
decreases 
B 
increases 
increases 
C 
no change 
increases 
D 
increases 
decreases 
(Total 1 mark) 
265 

=== PAGE 312 ===
WAVE BEHAVIOR C.5 
266 
Doppler effect 
4. On approaching a stationary observer, a train sounds its horn and decelerates 
at a constant rate. At time t, the train passes by the observer and continues to 
decelerate at the same rate. Which diagram shows the variation with time of 
the frequency of the sound measured by the observer? 
A 
B 
horn's 
horn's 
----------- -----------· 
----------- ------------
frequency 
frequency 
time 
time 
C 
D 
horn's 
horn's 
- ---------- ------------
- ---------- ------------
frequency 
frequency 
time 
time 
(Total 1 mark) 
5. A stationary sound source emits waves of wavelength A and speed v. The 
source now moves away from a stationary observer. What are the wavelength 
and speed of the sound as measured by the observer? 
A 
longer than J 
equal to v 
B 
longer than J 
less than v 
C 
shorter than ,l 
equal to v 
D 
shorter than ,t 
less than v 
(Total 1 mark) 
6. Two lines, X and Y, in the emission spectrum of hydrogen gas are measured by 
an observer stationary with respect to the gas sample. The emission spectrum 
is then measured by an observer moving away from the gas sample. What are 
the correct shifts, X* and Y*, for spectral lines X and Y? 
increasing wavelength 
A 
X*X 
y• 
y 
B 
x• 
X 
Y*Y 

=== PAGE 313 ===
C 
XX* 
y 
y• 
D 
X 
X* 
yy• 
(Total 1 mark) 
7. Police use radar to detect speeding cars. A police officer stands at the side of 
the road and points a radar device at an approaching car. The device emits 
microwaves that reflect off the car and return to the device. A change in 
frequency between the emitted and received microwaves is measured at the 
radar device. 
The frequency change t::..f is given by: 
2fv 
t::..f=c" 
where f is the transmitter frequency, vis the speed of the car and c is the 
wave speed. 
The following data are available: 
Transmitter frequency,f = 40 GHz 
t::..f = 9.5 kHz 
Maximum speed allowed = 28 m s- 1 
(a) Explain the reason for the frequency change. 
(2) 
(b) Suggest why there is a factor of 2 in the frequency change equation. 
(2) 
(c) Determine whether the speed of the car is below the maximum speed 
allowed. 
(2) 
(Total 6 marks) 
8. Objects are detected by radar; that is, by sending out radio signals and then 
receiving the radio signals reflected back from the objects. In the diagram, a 
radar signal is sent from Earth to a planet . 
• 
Earth 
spin 
(a) The signal from which part of the planet returns to the Earth first? 
(2) 
(b) The signal from which part of the planet returns with the highest 
frequency? 
(2) 
(Total 4 marks) 
267 

=== PAGE 314 ===
D Fields 

=== PAGE 315 ===
D Fields 
◄ 
The aurora borealis ('northern lights') and aurora austral is ('southern lights') can sometimes be seen on 
clear, dark nights from spots near to the poles. They are caused by interactions between the solar wind 
and the Earth's magnetic field. 
A field is a region of space in which a force is experienced. Particles with mass 
experience forces when in gravitational fields, charged particles experience forces 
in electric fields and magnetic domains and moving charges experience forces in 
magnetic fields. The direction of force can be represented by field lines and the 
strength of field by the proximity at which the lines are drawn. While gravitational 
fields are always attractive, electric fields can be either attractive (for unlike charges) or 
repulsive (for like charges). 
A field can be uniform, with constant field strength throughout. In these instances, 
potential energy changes in equal steps with equal distances moved. Alternatively, 
fields can be radial, for example when a result of a point or spherical mass or charge. 
In gravitational radial fields, the force is proportional to the product of the masses and 
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. In electric fields, the 
force is proportional to the product of the charges and inversely proportional to the 
square of the distance between them. You will also learn about Kepler's laws. 
Electromagnetism emerges from electric currents because moving charges have 
associated magnetic fields. When placed within the field of an existing magnet, a 
perpendicular force is exerted on the charges or the conductor that contains them. The 
size of force depends on the charge (or length of conductor), its speed (or current) and 
the magnetic field strength, and you will also learn how to determine the force per unit 
length between parallel wires. Electromagnetism can be put to use in spinning motors 
or oscillating loudspeaker cones. 
269 
