=== PAGE 316 ===
Gravitational fields 

=== PAGE 317 ===
◄ 
Gravitational field strength, the gravitational force acting per unit mass, is often assumed to be constant 
worldwide. However, when Hirt et al. (Geophysical Research Letcers, 2013) used ultrahigh-resolution 
pictures to map the Earth's surface, gravitational field strength was found to vary from 9.83 N kg-1 in the 
Arctic Ocean to 9.76 N kg-1 at the summit of Huascaran, a mountain in Peru (shown here). As you 
study the content in this chapter, think about why this variation exists and what might be responsible. 
Guiding Questions 
How are the properties of a gravitational field quantified? 
How does an understanding of gravitational fields allow humans to explore the 
solar system? 
Nature of Science 
Newton's universal law of gravitation suggests a very simple relationship between 
the mass of a body and the force between it and every other particle of mass in the 
Universe. However, it does not explain why matter behaves in this way. 
To help us understand the way a gravitational field varies throughout space, 
we will use the visual models of field lines and potential surfaces. 
If we want to make a body move, we have to apply a force. We could push or pull it 
with our hands. If the body moved without us touching it, we would call it magic. 
But when a body is released from a height, it falls without being in contact with 
anything. How? The gravitational force. 
What is gravity? It is the thing that makes a ball fall toward the Earth. Why does a ball fall to 
the Earth? Because of gravity. We made up gravity to answer the question. The gravitational 
force on a body is proportional to its mass. We have been using weight = mg since it was 
introduced as a force. But mass is not just related to weight. From Newton's second law, we 
know that mass is the ratio of force to acceleration, which does not refer to gravity. 
\Ve end up with two definitions of mass: inertial mass and gravitational mass. Newton 
did not manage to explain the connection between these two definitions. Einstein did, 
however, by realizing that if you were in a box accelerating upward at 9.8 ms-2, it would 
feel the same as if you were in a box that was stationary on the Earth. This principle of 
equivalence is the basis of Einstein's general theory of relativity, the modern gravitational 
model, which explains gravitation in terms of the curvature of space-time. 
Students should understand: 
Kepler's three laws of orbital motion 
I 
2 
Newton's universal law of gravitation as given by F = c"\~ for bodies treated as 
point masses 
conditions under which extended bodies can be treated as point masses 
gravitational field strength g at a point is the force per unit mass experienced by a 
small point mass at that point as given by g = ~ = G~ 
gravitational field lines. 
• • 
FIELDS D.1 
271 

=== PAGE 318 ===
FIELDS D. 1 
,------------------------. 0 
• 
l 
.... 
D. l Figure l The apple 
dro ps and the Sun seems 
to move in a circle, but it 
is gravity that makes both 
things happen 
Was it reasonable for 
Newton to think that 
his law applied to the 
whole Universe? 
We often look at the 
applications of physics 
with an international 
perspective but 
perhaps we should 
adopt a universal 
perspective. 
.... 
The modern equivalent of the 
apparatus used by Cavendish 
to measure G in 1798. 
Physics utilizes a 
number of constants 
such as G. What is 
the purpose of these 
constants and how are 
they determined? (NOS) 
272 
Gravitational fields 
Gravitational force and field 
We have all seen how an object falls to the ground when released. Newton was not 
the first person to realize that an apple falls to the ground when dropped from a tree. 
However, he did recognize that the force that pulls the apple to the ground is the same 
as the force that holds the Earth in its orbit around the Sun. This was not obvious 
- after all, the apple moves in a straight line and the Earth moves in a circle. In this 
chapter, we will see how these forces are connected . 
Newton's universal law of gravitation 
Newton extended his ideas further to say that every single particle of mass in the 
Universe 'gravitates toward' every other particle of mass. In other words, everything in 
the Universe is attracted to everything else. So there is a force between the end of your 
nose and a lump of rock on the Moon. 
Newton's universal law of gravitation is often phrased as: 
Every single point mass attracts every other point mass with a force that is directly 
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square 
of their separation. 
If two point masses with mass m1 and m2 are separated by a distance r, then the force, F, 
experienced by each will be given by: 
F 
of---•~ 
m, 
◄ D. l Figure 2 The gravitational force F 
between two point masses. 
The constant of proportionality is the universal gravitational constant G. 
G = 6.67 x 10-11 m 3kg- 1 s-2 
Therefore the equation is: 
Extended bodies 
An extended body is any object at which the mass is not confined to a point. 
Every extended body has a center of mass around which mass is uniformly distributed. In 
regularly shaped bodies with uniform distribution of mass, this is the center of the object. 
The center of gravity of a body is the point at which the entirety of its weight can be 
taken to act. 
In a uniform field, the center of mass and the center of gravity are identical. The center 
of gravity of a sphere is at its center and this particular example of an extended body 
can be treated as a point mass. 
In a non-uniform field, the gravitational force acting on the mass is greater where field 
strength is greater; the center of gravity of the Moon (for example) is not in the center 
but instead slightly toward the Earth. 

=== PAGE 319 ===
Spheres of mass 
By working out the total force between every particle of one sphere and every 
particle of another sphere, Newton deduced that spheres of mass follow the same law, 
where r is the separation between their centers. This is because spheres are 
symmetrically spherical. 
How fast does the apple drop? 
If we apply Newton's universal law to the apple on the surface of the Earth, 
we find that it will experience a force given by: 
where: 
So: 
F= Gm1m2 
r2 
m 1 = mass of the Earth = 5.97 x 1024 kg 
m2 = mass of the apple = 250 g 
r = radius of the Earth= 6378 km (at the equator) 
F = 2.43N 
From Newton's second law, we know that F = ma. 
2.43 
So: acceleration a of the apple = 0_25 m s-2 
a=9.79ms-2 
This is very close to the average value for the acceleration of free fall on the Earth's 
surface. It need not be exactly the same since 9.81 m s-2 is an average for the whole 
Earth, the radius of the Earth being maximum at the equator. 
Exercise 
QI. The mass of the Moon is 7.35 x 1022kg and its radius is 1.74 x 103km. 
What is the acceleration due to gravity on the Moon's surface? 
Gravitational field 
The fact that both the apple and the Earth experience a force without being in contact 
makes gravity different from the other forces we have come across. To model this 
situation, we introduce the idea of a field. A field (in the physical sense) is a region 
of space where forces are experienced by bodies with the appropriate property. 
A gravitational field is a region where you find gravity. More precisely, a gravitational 
field is defined as a region of space where a mass experiences a force because of 
its mass. 
So there is a gravitational field in your classroom since masses experience a force in it. 
4) 
A 
D.1 Figure 3 Forces 
between two spheres. Even 
though these bodies do not 
have the same mass. the 
force on them is the same 
size. This is due to Newton's 
third law: if mass m1 exerts 
a force on mass m2, then 
m2 will exert an equal and 
opposite force on m1. 
273 

=== PAGE 320 ===
FIELDS D. 1 
D.1 Figure 4 The region 
surrounding M is a 
gravitational field since all the 
test masses experience a force. 
What measurements 
of a binary star system 
need to be made in 
order to determine the 
nature of the two stars? 
(C S, E.5) 
... 
D.1 Figure 5 Field lines for 
a sphere of mass. 
274 
Gravitational fields 
Field strength on the Earth's surface: 
Substituting: 
M = mass of the Earth = 5.97 x 1024 kg 
r = average radius of the Earth= 6371 km 
gives 
g = G~= 9.81 Nkg-1 
r 
This is the same as the acceleration due to gravity, which is what you might 
expect, since Newton's second law says that a = ti,-
Gravitational field strength, g 
This gives a measure of how much force a body will experience in the field. It is defined 
as the force per unit mass experienced by a small point mass placed in the field. 
So if a test mass, m, experiences a force Fat some point in space, then the field strength, 
g, at that point is given by:g = ~ 
Gravitational field strength g is measured in N kg-• and is a vector quantity. 
Note: When a second mass (with its own gravitational field) is placed in the original 
field, the field strength at any g iven location is a vector sum of the two. It is convenient, 
therefore, to define gravitational field strength on the assumption that the second mass 
is a 'point' (i.e. so that its own gravitational field has no effect on the field strength 
measured at the point) and 'small' (i.e. much smaller than the original mass). 
Gravitational field around a spherical object 
The force experienced by a mass min the field produced by a mass Mis given by: 
Mm 
F = G7 
F 
So: field strength at this point in space, g = -m 
M 
So: 
g= G7 
Exercise 
Q2. The mass of Jupiter is 1.89 x 1027 kg and its radius is 71492 km. 
What is the gravitational field strength on the surface of Jupiter? 
Q3. What is the gravitational field strength at a distance of 1000 km from the 
surface of the Earth? 
Field lines 
Field lines are drawn in the direction that a mass would accelerate if placed in the field 
- they are used to help us visualize the field. 
The field lines for a spherical mass are shown in Figure 5: 
• The arrows give the direction of the field. 
• The field strength, g, is given by the density of the lines . 

=== PAGE 321 ===
Gravitational field close to the Earth 
\1/hen we are doing experiments close to the Earth, in the classroom, for example, we 
assume that the gravitational field strength is constant throughout. This means that 
wherever you put a mass in the classroom it is always pulled downward with the same 
force. We say that the field is uniform. 
t t t t t t 
Addition of field 
Since field strength is a vector, when we add field strengths caused by several bodies, 
we must remember to add them vectorially. 
In this example, the angle between the vectors is 90°. This means that we can use 
Pythagoras to find the resultant. 
0 
0 
Worked example 
Calculate the gravitational field strength at point A. 
B • 8 
A • 
8 
+--- l m ---++----- 2.5 m ___ ,.___ 2.5 m ---+ 
Solution 
The gravitational field strength at A is equal to the sum of the fields due to the two 
masses. 
G x 1000 
field strength due to large mass= 
2_52 
= 1.07 x 10-8N kg- 1 
G x 100 
field strength due to small mass = 
2_52 
= 1.07 x 10-9 Nkg- 1 
field strength = 1.07 x 10-8 - 1.07 x I0-9 
= 9.63 x 10-9Nkg- 1 
D.1 Figure 6 Close to the 
Earth the field is uniform. 
The value of g is 
different in different 
places on the Earth. 
Do you know what it is 
where you live? 
W hat are the benefits 
of using consistent 
terminology to describe 
different types of fields? 
(NOS) 
D.1 Figure 7 Vector 
add it ion of field strength. 
Since field strength g is 
a vector. the resultant 
field strength equals 
the vector sum. 
275 

=== PAGE 322 ===
FIELDS D. 1 
How can the motion of 
electrons in the atom be 
modeled on planetary 
motion and in what 
ways does this model 
fail? (NOS} 
D.1 Figure 8 The Earth 
orbiting the Sun. 
276 
Gravitational fields 
Exercise 
Q4. Calculate the gravitational field strength at point B in the figure in the worked 
example above. 
Q 5. Calculate the gravitational field strength at point A if the big mass were 
changed for a 100 kg mass. 
The solar system 
The solar system consists of the Sun at the center, surrounded by eight orbiting 
planets. The shape of the orbits is slightly elliptical but, to make things simpler, we will 
assume them to be circular. We know that for a body to travel in a circle, there must 
be an unbalanced force (called the centripetal force, mw2r) acting toward the center. 
The force that holds the planets in orbit around the Sun is the gravitational force,~-
Equating these two expressions gives us an equation for orbital motion: 
Mm 
mw2r = G- r2 
Now w is the angular velocity of the planet; that is, the angle swept out bi a radius per 
unit time. If the time taken for one revolution (2n radians) is T, then w = ; . 
Substituting into the equation above gives: 
(2n)
2 
Mm 
m T r = G~ 
Rearranging gives: 
where Mis the mass of the Sun. 
T2 
4:,r2 
r3 = GM 
0 --~1 
GMm \....I 
rl 
,' 
T2 
So for planets orbiting the Sun, 3 is a constant, orP is proportional to r3• 
r 
This is Kepler's third law . 

=== PAGE 323 ===
From this, we can deduce that the planet closest to the Sun (Mercury) has a shorter 
time period than the planet furthest away. This is supported by measurements: 
time period of Mercury = 0.24 years 
time period of Neptune = 165 years. 
Exercise 
Q6. Use a database of planetary information to make a table of the values of 
time period and radius for all the planets. Plot a graph to show that T2 is 
proportional to r3• 
Kepler's laws 
Kepler is associated with three laws for planetary motion. All three can be derived 
from Newton's laws, but Kepler came up with them empirically by measuring orbital 
times and radii of the planets and looking for relationships among the numbers. 
First law 
Planetary orbits are elliptical with a star at a focus. 
In this course, we deal only with circular orbits (a special example of an ellipse), but 
Newton's law also predicts elliptical orbits. 
Second law 
The radius vector from the star to the orbiting body sweeps equal areas in equal times. 
This is obvious for circular orbits but not so obvious for elliptical ones. 
equal areas 
in equal times 
planet 
Qualitatively, we can understand the second law as being because the orbiting body 
(for example, a planet) gets faster as it gets closer to the star. This is because its kinetic 
energy must increase as its potential energy decreases, which in turn is because its 
energy is conserved. 
How is uniform circular 
motion like. and unlike. 
real-life orbits? (A2) 
D.1 Figure 9 Kepler's first 
and second laws. 
277 

=== PAGE 324 ===
FIELDS D. 1 
It is strange how 
everyone can describe 
the motion of the 
planets as viewed from 
a long way outside 
the solar system but 
few can describe the 
motion as seen from 
the Earth. 
There are two versions 
of the equation for 
centripetal force. 
Speed version: 
F= mv' 
r 
Angular speed version: 
F = mw 2r 
The orbits of spy 
satellites are set so that 
they pass over places 
of interest. Which 
countries have most 
spy satellites passing 
overhead? 
278 
Gravitational fields 
Third law 
The square of the orbital period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis 
of the ellipse (the distance from the center of the ellipse to the farthest point on the 
perimeter). For a circular orbit, T2 tx r 3, where Tis the orbital period and r is the radius 
of the orbit. 
This means that the ratio of T2 to r 3 is constant for all planets in the same solar system. 
This law comes from equating the gravitational force according to Newton's law with 
the equation for centripetal force. 
Earth satellites 
The equations we have derived for the orbits of the planets also apply to the satellites 
that humans have put into orbits around the Earth. This means that the satellites closer 
to the Earth have a time period much shorter than the distant ones. For example, a 
low-orbit spy satellite could orbit the Earth once every two hours while a much higher 
TV satellite orbits only once a day. 
Exercise 
Q7. So that they can stay above the same point on the Earth, TV satellites have a 
time period equal to one day. Calculate the radius of their orbit. 
Q8. A spy satellite orbits 400 km above the Earth. If the radius of the Earth is 
6400 km, what is the time period of the orbit? 
Guiding Questions revisited 
How are the properties of a gravitational field quantified? 
How does an understanding of gravitational fields allow humans to explore 
the solar system? 
In this chapter, we have considered gravitational fields through the models of Kepler 
and Newton to develop an understanding of how: 
• Kepler's three laws state collectively that bodies' orbits of a celestial mass are 
elliptical with the mass at a focus, that equal areas are swept out by these bodies 
in equal times, and that the square of a body's orbital period is proportional to 
the cube of its orbital radius (for circular orbits). 
• Newton's universal law of gravitation states that the gravitational force acting 
between any two masses in the Universe is proportional to the product of the 
masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between their 
centers of masses. 
• Gravitational field strength is defined as the gravitational force acting per unit 
mass. 
• Field lines represent the direction of the force that would act on a mass placed in 
the field, with the closeness of the lines indicating the strength of the field. 
• Knowledge of forces, energy and fields can be used to estimate the escape speed 
that a solar system probe or telescope would need to be launched with from the 
Earth, assuming the atmosphere causes no drag. 

=== PAGE 325 ===
Practice questions 
I. An object of mass m released from rest near the surface of a planet has an 
initial acceleration z. What is the gravitational field strength near the surface of 
the planet? 
A z 
B 
1.. 
m 
C mz 
D 
!!!. z 
(Total 1 mark) 
2. Which graph shows the relationship between gravitational force F between 
two point masses and their separation r? 
(1) 
A 
B 
F 
F 
r, 
C 
D 
(Total 1 mark) 
3. 
Two isolated point particles of mass 4M and 9M are separated by a distance 
1 m. A point particle of mass Mis placed a distance x from the particle of mass 
9M. The net gravitational force on Mis zero. What is x? 
4M 
M 
9M 
• 
• 
• 
1--
~1 not to scale 
X 
A 
~ 
13 m 
B lm 
5 
C lm 
5 
D 
.2... 
13 m 
(Total 1 mark) 
279 

=== PAGE 326 ===
FIELDS D. 1 
280 
Gravitational fields 
4. A planet is in a circular o rbit around a star. The speed of the planet is constant. 
(a) Explain why a centripetal force is needed for the planet to be in a circular 
~t. 
m 
(b) State the nature of this centripetal force. 
The following data are given: 
Mass of planet = 8.0 x 1024 kg 
Radius of planet = 9.1 x 106 m 
(1) 
(c) Determine the gravitational field strength at the surface of the planet. 
(2) 
(Total 5 marks) 
5. The moon Phobos moves around the planet Mars in a circular orbit. 
(a) Outline why the gravitational force does no work on Phobos. 
(1) 
The orbital period T of a moon orbiting a planet of mass Mis given by: 
1# =kM 
where R is the average distance between the center of the planet and the center 
of the moon. 
G 
(b) Show that k = 4a,. 
(3) 
The following data for the Mars-Phobos system and the Earth-Moon system 
are available: 
Mass of Earth = 5.97 x 1024 kg 
The Earth-Moon distance is 41 times the Mars-Phobos distance. 
The orbital period of the Moon is 86 times the orbital period of Phobos. 
(c) Calculate, in kg, the mass of Mars. 
(2) 
(Total 6 marks) 
6. (a) In a cave below the surface of the Earth, which is correct about the gravity? (1) 
A 
There is more gravity than at the Earth's surface. 
B 
There is less gravity than at the Earth's surface. 
C 
There is the same gravity as at the Earth's surface. 
(b) Explain your answer. 
(1) 
(Total 2 marks) 
7. 
(a) As you move away from the Earth, its gravity gets weaker. But suppose 
it got stronger. If that were so, would it be possible for objects, like the 
Moon, to orbit the Earth? 
(1) 
A 
Yes, just as they do presently. 
B 
Yes, but unlike they do presently. 
C 
No, orbital motion could not occur. 
(b) Explain your answer. 
(Total 2 marks) 

=== PAGE 327 ===
8. The Sun orbits the center of the Milky Way galaxy at a radius of 30 000 light 
years and with a period of orbit of 200 million years. Assume that the mass 
distribution of matter in the galaxy is concentrated mainly in a central uniform 
sphere and the Sun lies in one of the arms. 
(a) Obtain an expression for the period of 
orbit T of the Sun in terms of its radius 
of orbit, r, G and M, the mass of the 
.. ... '• • • • "1;;;;;.:.,.•• • 
_-•rl.! • • 
.. 
Sun 
g 
galaxy. 
(b) Determine a value of the mass of the galaxy. 
(1) 
(1) 
(c) If the Sun represents the mass of an average star, estimate the number of 
stars in the Milky Way. 
(1) 
(Total 3 marks) 
281 
