=== PAGE 395 ===
Fission 

=== PAGE 396 ===
NUCLEAR AND QUANTUM PHYSICS E.4 
Fission 
350 
• • 
◄ 
Lise Meitner (7 878- 1968) was the second woman to be awarded a doctorate in physics at the 
University of Vienna and the first to become a professor of physics in Germany. In 1938, she and Otto 
Hahn discovered nuclear fission when bombarding various isotopes (including uranium) with neutrons, 
despite fleeing to Sweden that year because of the anti-Jewish Nuremberg Laws. 
Unlike her colleague, Meitner was never awarded a Nobel Prize, although the radioactive element 
meitnerium (created in 1982) is named after her 
1 
Guiding Questions 
In which form is energy stored within the nucleus of the atom? 
How can the energy released from the nucleus be harnessed? 
When a 1 kg block of ice is lifted to a height of 1 m from the ground, approximately 
10 J of work is done. Melting 1 kg of ice requires 3 34 000 J of energy. The reason that 
the amount of energy required to melt the ice is so much more than to lift it is that 
the force that holds the molecules together, the electric force, is much greater than the 
gravitational force. 
The force holding the nucleus together is the strong nuclear force, which is much larger 
than the electric force. Consequently, the energy associated with nuclear reactions is 
more than that involved in chemical reactions or changes of state. This means that the 
energy released through fission per kilogram of uranium is much bigger than the energy 
released through combustion per kilogram of a fuel such as coal. This is an advantage 
because the cost of transporting the fuel is reduced. 
Students should understand: 
energy is released in spontaneous and neutron-induced fission 
the role of chain reactions in nuclear fission reactions 
the role of control rods, moderators, heat exchangers and shielding in a nuclear 
power plant 
the properties of the products of nuclear fission and their management. 
Nuclear fission 
Nuclear fission is the splitting of large nuclei into two smaller ones. If we look at 
the graph of binding energy per nucleon vs nucleon number in Figure 1, we can see 
that the binding energies per nucleon of barium and krypton are higher than that of 
uranium. So if a uranium nucleus splits into a barium nucleus and a krypton nucleus, 
energy is released. This energy is transferred to the kinetic energy of the daughter 
nuclei and any excess neutrons. Uranium-236 nuclei do not tend to remain whole 
for millions of years without splitting. The fission process is spontaneous, which 
means it cannot be slowed down or speeded up by external efforts. However, when a 
uranium-235 nucleus absorbs a neutron, it temporarily turns into uranium-236. This 
increases the binding energy (because there is another neutron in the nucleus) but 
reduces the binding energy per nucleon enough to enable the nucleus to split. 

=== PAGE 397 ===
92 
36 Kr 
> 
8 
2360 
"' 
~ 
92 
? 
0 "' 
u 
6 
::, 
C: 
ti 
0.. 
>-. 
e_.o 4 
" 
C: 
"' 
0.0 
.5 
"O 
.5 2 
.,:, 
0 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
nucleon number 
The phrase 'binding energy' sounds as though an increase in binding energy should 
make the nucleus more stable and not less stable. In fact, the binding energy per 
nucleon is relatively low when the nucleus is in an excited state and the nucleons shake 
about. Energy is released when the nucleus becomes more stable and the binding 
energy per nucleon increases, for example, by the emission of gamma radiation or 
during fission. 
You may have noticed that the numbers do not add up. Uranium has 144 neutrons 
but the total number of neutrons in barium and krypton is 141. These extra neutrons 
are expelled from the reaction and can be used in nuclear reactors to induce further 
fission reactions. 
Worked example 
Find the energy released if uranium-236 splits into krypton-92 and barium-141. 
Solution 
binding energy of236U = 236 x 7.6 
= 1793.6MeV 
binding energy of 141Ba = 141 x 8 
= 1128MeV 
binding energy of92Kr = 92 x 8.2 
= 754.4MeV 
gain in binding energy= (1128 + 754.4} - 1793.6 
= 88.8MeV 
Since this leads to a release of energy, this process is possible. 
◄ E.4 Figure 1 Binding energy 
per nucleon vs nucleon 
number cuNe revealing 
fission possibility. 
Start by multiplying 
the binding energy 
per nucleon (from 
the vertical axis of 
the graph) by the 
number of nucleons 
for each of the nuclei. 
Then calculate the 
difference in binding 
energy between the 
original nucleus and 
the daughter nuclei 
to see whether the 
binding energy (i.e. the 
energy released) has 
increased. Note that 
any neutrons released 
are not 'bound' to 
anything, so there is no 
binding energy to be 
considered. 
351 

=== PAGE 398 ===
NUCLEAR AND QUANTUM PHYSICS E.4 
Fission 
To answer these 
questions (in which 
we have not been 
provided with binding 
energy information), 
you must find the 
difference in mass 
between the original 
nucleus and the 
products. To convert to 
MeV. simply multiply 
by 931.5. 
Finland produces 30% 
of its electricity from 
nuclear power so has 
a lot of nuclear waste 
to dispose of. To solve 
this problem, they are 
constructing many 
kilometers of tunnels 
into the very old and 
geologically sound 
rock close to Olkiluoto. 
The facility. known as 
Onkalo. will eventually 
contain 9000 tonnes of 
spent fuel. 
How is binding energy 
used to determine 
the rate of energy 
production in a nuclear 
power plant {E.3)? 
E.4 Figure 2 A chain 
► 
reaction from nuclear fission. 
352 
Exercise 
Use the table to answer the following questions. 
Ql. If 236U splits into 100Mo and 126S n, how 
many neutrons will be produced? 
92 
u 
233 
233039628 
Calculate the energy released in this 
92 
u 
236 
236.045563 
reaction. 
42 
Mo 
100 
99.907476 
Q2. 
233U splits into 1388a and 86Kr plus 
so 
Sn 
126 
125.907653 
nine neutrons. Calculate the energy 
released when this takes place. 
56 
Ba 
138 
137.905233 
36 
Kr 
86 
85910615 
0 
n 
1.008664 
Nuclear power 
When a large nucleus splits into two smaller ones, the total binding energy increases, 
resulting in the release of about 100 MeV of energy. This is approximately 100 million 
times more energy per molecule than when coal burns, so any material that does this 
would be a valuable source of energy. 
If a uranium-235 nucleus absorbs a neutron, 
it will undergo fission, but naturally occurring 
uranium only contains 0.7% 235U. The remainder 
is mainly 238U, which absorbs neutrons without 
undergoing fission. Before naturally occurring 
uranium can be used as a fuel, the amount of 
235U must be increased to about 3%. This is 
called enrichment. 
The chain reaction 
Fuel 
Energy density 
/MJ L-1 
Uranium fuel 
1534 000000 
Coal 
72.4 
~ 
E.4Tablel 
Splitting a mu nucleus requires some energy because the nucleons are held together 
by a strong force. This energy can be supplied by adding a neutron to a 235U nucleus. 
This reduces the stability of the nucleus so it splits in two. As a result, there are too 
many neutrons for the smaller daughter nuclei and some are released. These neutrons 
can be captured by more mu nuclei, and so on, leading to a chain reaction. 
mu 

=== PAGE 399 ===
Moderation 
The neutrons will only be absorbed if they are traveling slowly - otherwise, they will 
pass straight through. In terms of kinetic energy. this would be about 1 eV, which is 
much less than the MeV they possess after being expelled during the fission process. 
To achieve a chain reaction, we need these neutrons to be absorbed so they need to be 
slowed down or moderated. This is done by introducing some small nuclei between 
the 235U (Figure 3). Water is sometimes used as a moderator because it contains 
hydrogen nuclei. The neutrons collide with these nuclei and, because they have a 
similar mass to the neutrons, they receive energy and the neutrons slow down: a 
near-elastic collision. 
moderator nucl~s/ 
neutron 
➔ .S 
o-----~ 
Critical mass 
Another critical factor that determines whether a chain reaction can take place is the 
size of the piece of uranium. If it is too small, then before the neutrons have traveled 
far enough to be slowed down, they will have left the reacting piece of uranium. The 
minimum mass required for a chain reaction is called the critical mass. 
The nuclear power station 
gas 
control rod 
turbin 
steam 
reactor 
graphit 
generator 
fuel bundl 
cold water 
Control in a nuclear reactor 
The rate of reaction in a nuclear reactor is limited by the fact that the fuel contains a 
high proportion of 238U, which absorbs neutrons. Since this cannot easily be altered, 
it cannot be used to slow the reaction down if it goes too fast. Instead, this is done by 
introducing control rods of a neutron-absorbing material, such as boron, between the 
fuel rods (Figure 4). 
Using the word 
moderation sounds like 
the moderator slows 
down the reaction. 
but it does not. The 
moderator slows down 
the neutrons, enabling 
the chain reaction. If 
the moderator was 
removed, the reaction 
would slow down. 
E.4 Figure 3 Only slow-
moving neutrons are 
absorbed. 
Pellets of nuclear fuel are 
stacked into tubes, which 
are bundled together before 
being put into the reactor. 
E.4 Figure 4 An advanced 
gas-cooled reactor {AGR). 
353 

=== PAGE 400 ===
NUCLEAR AND QUANTUM PHYSICS E.4 
Fission 
The efficiency of the 
nuclear reactor is not 
as high as might be 
expected. Firstly, the 
fuel has to be enriched, 
which takes a lot of 
energy Then, it is not 
possible to get all the 
energy from the fuel, 
because when the 
amount of 235U falls 
below a certain value, a 
chain reaction can no 
longer be sustained. 
In which form is energy 
released as a resu It of 
nuclear fission (A.3)? 
E.4 Figure 5 Sankey 
I-"' 
diagram for a nuclear reactor. 
A nuclear reactor does 
not burn fuel so is not 
dependent on oxygen 
for it to function This 
makes nuclear power 
particularly useful for 
powering submarines. 
To what extent is there 
a role for fission in 
addressing climate 
change? (NOS) 
Different countries 
have different policies 
regarding the use of 
nuclear power. What 
is the policy where 
you live? 
354 
There are many different designs of nuclear reactor but they all have a nuclear reaction 
at the core. The energy released when the nuclei split is given to the fission fragments. 
The temperature of a body is related to the average kinetic energy of the particles, 
which means that the temperature of the fuel increases. The hot fuel can then be used 
to boil water and drive a turbine as in the coal-fired power station. 
The nuclear reactor is the part that produces heat and contains the fuel rods surrounded 
by, in this case, a graphite moderator (pale orange in Figure 4). The control rods can 
be raised and lowered to control the rate of reaction. The nuclear reactor is housed in 
a pressure vessel in which a gas is circulating (blue). This picks up heat from the fuel 
rods and transfers it to water in the heat exchanger. This water turns to steam and turns 
the turbine. The steam cools down and turns back to water in the condenser and is 
recirculated. 
nuclear energy 
in processed 
fuel 
thermal energy 
in steam 
heat loss 
mechanical energy 
in turbine 
electricity 
unused fuel 
Since there is no burning of fuel involved in the nuclear reactor, no carbon dioxide is 
produced. This makes it favorable when compared to the use of fossil fuels to produce 
electricity. However, there are other problems. 
Meltdown 
If the nuclear reaction is not controlled properly, it can overheat and the fuel rods 
can melt. This is called meltdown. When this happens, the fuel cannot be removed 
and may cause the pressure vessel to burst, sending radioactive material into the 
atmosphere. Situations like this have occurred in Chernobyl, Ukraine, in 1986 and in 
Fukushima, Japan, in 2011. However, it is not possible for a reactor to blow up as an 
atom bomb, since the fuel is not of a high enough grade. 
Meltdown can be caused by a malfunction in the cooling system or a leak in the 
pressure vessel. It would result in severe damage to the reactor, maybe leading to 
complete shutdown. Further damage outside the reactor is limited by the containment 
building, an airtight steel construction covered in concrete, which not only prevents 
dangerous material leaking out (an effect known as shielding), but will withstand a 
missile attack from the outside. Improved reactor design and construction, coupled 
with computer monitoring of possible points of weakness, has reduced the possibility 
of any failure of the structure that might lead to meltdown. However, it is almost 
impossible to design a reactor that will withstand the force of a major earthquake. 

=== PAGE 401 ===
Low level waste 
The extraction of uranium from the ground, the process of fuel enrichment and the 
transfer of heat from the fuel rods all leave some traces of radioactive material that must 
be carefully disposed of. The amount of radiation given off by this material is not great, 
but it must be disposed of in places away from human contact for 100-500 years. 
Old reactors are another form oflow level waste. They cannot simply be knocked down 
and recycled since most of the parts will have become radioactive. Instead, they must be 
left untouched for many years before demolition, or they can be encased in concrete. 
High level waste 
The biggest problem faced by the nuclear power industry is the disposal of spent fuel 
rods. Some of the product isotopes they contain are radioactive and have a half-life of 
thousands of years so need to be placed in safe storage for a very long time. Plutonium 
fuel rods are not considered safe for at least 240 000 years. There have been many 
suggestions regarding the waste: sending it to the Sun, putting it at the bottom of the 
sea, burying it in the icecap, or dropping it into a very deep hole. For the moment, 
most of it is dealt with in one of two ways: 
• 
It is stored under water at the site of the reactor for several years to cool off, then 
sealed in steel cylinders. 
• 
It is reprocessed to separate the plutonium and any remaining useful uranium 
from the fission fragments. This results in waste that is high in concentrations 
of the very radioactive fission fragments, but the half-life of these fragments is 
much shorter than either uranium or plutonium, so the need for very long-term 
storage is reduced. 
Exercise 
Q3. Barium-142 ('UBa) is a possible product of the fission of uranium-236. 
It decays by /J decay to lanthanum (La} with a half-life of 11 months. 
(a) Write the equation for the decay of barium. 
(b) Estimate how long will it take for the activity of the barium in a sample of 
radioactive waste to fall to io'oo of its original value. 
Q4. Plutonium-239 splits into zirconium-96 and xenon-136. Use Table 2 to 
answer the following questions. 
(a) How many neutrons will be emitted? 
(b) Write the nuclear equation for the reaction. 
(c) How much energy is released when the fission takes place? 
(d) What is the mass of 1 mole of plutonium? 
(e) How many atoms are there in 1 kg of plutonium? 
(f) How much energy in eV is released if 1 kg of plutonium undergoes 
fission? 
(g) Convert the answer to part (0 into joules. 
Q 5. A sample of nuclear fuel contains 3% 235U. If the energy density of 235U is 
9 x 1013 J kg-1, how much energy will l kg of fuel release? 
There seem to be a lot 
of problems associated 
with the production of 
energy from nuclear 
fuel. However, these 
problems are not 
insoluble. Scientists 
found a way of 
producing the energy. 
so it seems likely that 
they will be able to 
find solutions to these 
problems. 
Isotope 
Mass/u 
239.052158 
96Zr 
95.908275 
136Xe 
135.907213 
Neutron 
1.008664 
E.4Table2 
355 

=== PAGE 402 ===
NUCLEAR AND QUANTUM PHYSICS E.4 
Fission 
356 
Q6. An individual uses around lO000kWh of energy in a year. 
(a) How many joules is this? 
1 
(b) Using the energy density information in Table 2, calculate how much 
nuclear fuel this amounts to. 
Guiding Questions revisited 
In which form is energy stored within the nucleus of the atom? 
How can the energy released from the nucleus be harnessed? 
In this chapter, we have looked at the binding energies within nuclei and the structural 
components involved in commercial fission reactors to reveal how: 
• Energy is released when nucleons come together in the nucleus under the 
nuclear strong force and we refer to this as the 'binding energy'. Energy input is 
required to separate the nucleons. 
• If the binding energy per nucleon increases during a nuclear fission reaction, 
energy will be released in the form of the kinetic energy of the products. This 
can be harnessed by boiling water in a heat exchanger, with the resulting steam 
used to turn a turbine and power an electrical generator. 
• Control rods to absorb excess neutrons and slow the reaction, moderators to 
slow neutrons, enabling a continued chain reaction, and shielding to prevent the 
release of ionizing radiation are also required. Because the products of fission 
are radioactive, preparations must be made for their storage when the fuel rods 
are spent. 
Practice questions 
1. 
(a) (i) Distinguish between fission and radioactive decay. 
A nucleus of uranium-235 ei~U) may absorb a neutron and then undergo 
fission to produce nuclei of strontium-90 CT~Sr) and xenon-142 (11JXe), and 
some neutrons. 
The strontium-90 and the xenon-142 nuclei both undergo radioactive decay 
with the emission of fr particles. 
(4) 
(ii) Write down the nuclear equation for this fission reaction. 
(2) 
(iii) State the effect, if any, on the nucleon number and on the proton 
number of a nucleus when the nucleus undergoes fr decay. 
(2) 
The uranium-235 nucleus is stationary at the time that the fission reaction 
occurs. In this fission reaction, 198 MeV of energy is released. Of this total 
energy, 102 MeV and 65 MeV are the kinetic energies of the strontium-90 
and xenon-142 nuclei respectively. 
(b) (i) Calculate the momentum of the strontium-90 nucleus. 
(ii) Explain why the momentum of the strontium-90 nucleus is not 
(2) 
exactly equal to the momentum of the xenon-142 nucleus. 
(2) 

=== PAGE 403 ===
In the diagram, the circle represents the 
position of a uranium-235 nucleus 
before fission. The momentum of the 
strontium-90 nucleus after fission is 
represented by the arrow. 
(iii) Copy the diagram and draw an arrow to represent the momentum 
of the xenon-142 nucleus after the fission. 
(2) 
(c) In a fission reactor for the generation of electrical energy, 25% of the 
total energy released in a fission reaction is transferred to electrical energy. 
(i) Using the data in (b), calculate the electrical energy, in joules, 
produced as a result of nuclear fission of one nucleus. 
(2) 
(ii) The specific heat capacity of water is 4.2 x 103 J kg-1 K-1• Calculate 
the energy required to raise the temperature of250 g of water from 
2o•c to its boiling point (100°C). 
(3) 
(iii) Using your answer to (c)(i), determine the mass of uranium-235 
that must be fissioned in order to supply the amount of energy 
calculated in (c)(ii). The mass of a uranium-235 atom is 
3.9 X 10-25 kg. 
(4) 
(Total 25 marks) 
2. 
(a) When a neutron 'collides' with a nucleus of uranium-235 {2§~U), the 
following reaction can occur: 
2JlU + c\n --+ 'tlBa + ~~Kr+ 2c\n 
(i) State the name given to this type of nuclear reaction. 
(1) 
(ii) Energy is liberated in this reaction. In what form does this energy 
appear? 
(1) 
(b) Describe how the neutrons produced in this reaction may initiate a 
chain reaction. 
(1) 
The purpose of a nuclear power station is to produce electrical energy from 
nuclear energy. The diagram is a schematic representation of the principal 
components of a nuclear reactor 'pile' used in a certain type of nuclear power 
station. 
uranium ore 
fuel rods 
control rods 
graphite block 
(moderator) 
The function of the moderator is to slow down neutrons produced in a 
reaction such as that described in part (a). 
(c) (i) Explain why it is necessary to slow down the neutrons. 
(ii) Explain the function of the control rods. 
(3) 
(2) 
357 

=== PAGE 404 ===
NUCLEAR AND QUANTUM PHYSICS E.4 
Fission 
358 
(d) Describe briefly how the energy produced by the nuclear reactions is 
extracted from the reactor pile and then transferred to electrical energy. (4) 
(Total 12 marks) 
3. 
During the nuclear fission of nucleus X into nucleus Y and nucleus Z, 
energy is released. The binding energies per nucleon of X, Y and Z are Bx, 
BY and B2 respectively. What is true about the binding energy per nucleon 
ofX, Yand Z? 
A 
BY > Bx and B2 > Bx 
B 
Bx = BY and Bx = B2 
C 
Bx > BY and Bx > B2 
D Bx = BY +B2 
(Total 1 mark) 
4. A neutron collides headl-on with a stationary atom in the moderator of a 
nuclear power station. The kinetic energy of the neutron changes as a result. 
There is also a change in the probability that this neutron can cause nuclear 
fission. What are these changes? 
A 
increase 
increase 
B 
decrease 
increase 
C 
increase 
decrease 
D 
decrease 
decrease 
(Total 1 mark) 
5. 
A nuclear reactor contains atoms that are used for moderation and atoms 
that are used for control. What are the ideal properties of the moderator 
atoms and the control a toms in terms of neutron absorption? 
A 
poor absorber of neutrons 
poor absorber of neutrons 
B 
poor absorber of neutrons 
good absorber of neutrons 
C 
good absorber of neutrons 
poor absorber of neutrons 
D 
good absorber of neutrons 
good absorber of neutrons 
(Total 1 mark) 
6. What is the function of control rods in a nuclear power plant? 
A 
To slow neutrons down 
B 
To regulate fuel supply 
C 
To exchange thermal energy 
D 
To regulate the reaction rate 
(Total 1 mark) 
7. A nuclear power station contains an alternating current generator. Which 
energy transfer is performed by the generator? 
A 
Electrical to kinetic 
C 
Nuclear to kinetic 
B 
Kinetic to electrical 
D 
Nuclear to electrical 
(Total 1 mark) 

=== PAGE 405 ===
8. One possible fission reaction of uranium-235 (U-235) is: 
Mass of one atom of U-235 = 235 u 
Binding energy per nucleon for U-235 = 7.59 MeV 
Binding energy per nucleon for Xe-140 = 8.29 Me V 
Binding energy per nucleon for Sr-94 = 8.59 MeV 
(a) State what is meant by the binding energy of a nucleus. 
(1) 
(b) Outline why quantities such as atomic mass and nuclear binding 
energy are often expressed in non-SI units. 
(1) 
(c) Show that the energy released in the reaction is about 180 MeV. 
(1) 
A nuclear power station uses U-235 as fuel. Assume that every fission 
reaction ofU-235 gives rise to 180 MeV of energy. 
(d) Estimate, in J kg-1, the specific energy ofU-235. 
(e) The power station has a useful power output of 1.2 OW and an 
efficiency of 36%. Determine the mass ofU-235 that undergoes fission 
in one day. 
(f) The specific energy of fossil fuel is typically 30 MJ kg 1• Suggest one 
(2) 
(2) 
advantage of U-235 compared with fossil fuels in a power station. 
(1) 
A sample of waste produced by the reactor contains 1.0 kg of strontium-94 
(Sr-94). Sr-94 is radioactive and undergoes beta minus (fr) decay into a 
daughter nuclide X. The reaction for this decay is: 
94Sr ➔ X + ii' + e 
38 
e 
(g) Write down the proton number of nuclide X. 
(1) 
The graph shows the variation with time of the mass of Sr-94 remaining in the 
sample. 
J,f 1.0 
~ 0.9 
~ 
e 0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0 
25 
50 
75 
JOO 
125 150 175 200 225 
rime/s 
(h) State the half-life of Sr-94. 
(1) 
(i) Calculate the mass of Sr-94 remaining in the sample after 10 minutes. 
(2) 
(Total 12 marks) 
359 
