HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
34
Origins of cells
A2.1
•	 What plausible hypothesis could account for the origin of life?
•	 What intermediate stages could there have been between non-living matter and the 
first living cells? 
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A2.1.1 	 Conditions on early Earth and the pre-biotic formation of carbon compounds 
(HL only)
	 A2.1.2 	 Cells as the smallest units of self-sustaining life (HL only)
	 A2.1.3 	 Challenge of explaining the spontaneous origin of cells (HL only)
	 A2.1.4 	 Evidence for the origin of carbon compounds (HL only)
	 A2.1.5 	 Spontaneous formation of vesicles by coalescence of fatty acids into spherical 
bilayers (HL only)
	 A2.1.6 	 RNA as a presumed first genetic material (HL only)
	 A2.1.7 	 Evidence for a last universal common ancestor (HL only)
	 A2.1.8 	 Approaches used to estimate dates of the first living cells and the last universal 
common ancestor (HL only)
	 A2.1.9 	 Evidence for the evolution of the last universal common ancestor in the vicinity 
of hydrothermal vents (HL only)
Conditions on early Earth and the pre‑biotic 
formation of carbon compounds
Around 4.3 billion years ago, much of the surface of the Earth was molten rock. This time is known as 
the Hadean eon (from Greek mythology where ‘Hades’ is the God of the Underworld, and the term is 
associated with ‘Hell’, indicating the conditions on Earth at the time). As Earth cooled, gases released 
by volcanic activity formed the atmosphere. The atmosphere included ammonia (NH3), nitrogen, 
methane, water and significantly higher levels of carbon dioxide compared to today’s atmosphere (see 
Figure A2.1.1). Both methane and carbon dioxide are greenhouse gases – this means that they 
absorb and react with infrared radiation emitted from the surface of the planet, causing the surface of 
the Earth to heat up, resulting in higher temperatures (a process known as the greenhouse effect).
The atmosphere today has relatively high levels of oxygen, essential for sustaining life. Also important 
for the preservation of life on the Earth’s surface is the presence of ozone in the stratosphere 
(Figure A2.1.2). Ozone (O3) is formed naturally through the interaction of solar ultraviolet (UV) 
radiation with molecular oxygen (O2). On the early Earth there was a lack of free oxygen and, 
therefore, ozone in the atmosphere, resulting in ultraviolet light penetration and high levels of UV 
light at the surface of the planet. UV radiation 3.7 billion years ago was 100 times more intense than 
today. UV causes damage to DNA and causes it to mutate – lower levels of UV allow life to exist on 
the surface of the Earth today.
	
◆Greenhouse gas: 
the heating caused 
by the atmosphere on 
Earth’s surface because 
certain atmospheric gases 
absorb and emit infrared 
radiation.
	
◆Greenhouse 
effect: process in which 
greenhouse gases trap 
outgoing long-wave 
radiation from the Earth, 
causing the planet to be 
warmer than it would 
otherwise be.
1	 Compare and 
contrast the 
atmospheric 
conditions of the 
early Earth with 
the atmosphere 
of today.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
35
The conditions on the early Earth may have 
caused a variety of carbon compounds to 
form spontaneously by chemical processes 
that do not occur now. If energy was added 
to the gases that made up Earth’s early 
atmosphere, the building blocks of life (for 
example, amino acids, peptides, ribose, 
nucleobases, fatty acids, nucleotides and 
oligonucleotides) could have been created. 
The idea that high energy or UV radiation 
led to the formation of the first biological 
molecules is called the ‘primordial (or pre-
biotic) soup’ hypothesis and was originally 
proposed independently by Alexander 
Oparin in 1924 and JBS Haldane in 1929.
However, high-energy UV light is 
destructive of the chemistry of early life. 
When a molecule is destroyed, it is broken 
into smaller, very reactive pieces that 
undergo additional reactions, eventually 
recombining to form larger high-energy 
molecules. For example, pyruvic acid, a 
molecule that is central to key metabolic 
pathways in cells, forms larger molecules 
when dissolved in water and illuminated 
with UV light.
Research has shown that the bases of nucleotides are extremely efficient at reducing the harmful effects 
of UV radiation, thereby protecting the pentose sugar and phosphate components of nucleic acids. In 
the presence of strong UV light, RNA was shown to be more likely to form chains than other 
molecules. It is therefore possible that the high UV levels on primordial Earth, rather than being an 
obstacle to the origin of life, may have acted as a selection factor that drove the process forwards. 
Stratosphere
(10–31 miles)
ozone layer
UV-A
UV-B
UV-C
UV-C
Troposphere
(0–10 miles)
 
■Figure A2.1.2 Ozone absorbs the most energetic frequencies of ultraviolet radiation, 
known as UV-C and UV-B, which are frequencies that harm living organisms
2	 List the gases 
which cause the 
greenhouse effect. 
The Earth today
Most of the surface
is covered by oceans
The early Earth
Most of the surface
was covered by volcanoes
Earth’s early atmosphere
Most of the atmosphere
was carbon dioxide and
water vapour
4%
water vapour
Earth’s atmosphere today
Most of the atmosphere
is nitrogen and oxygen
average surface
temperature above 400°C
traces of
nitrogen,
ammonia,
methane
traces of
carbon dioxide,
water vapour,
ammonia,
methane
95%
carbon dioxide
 78%
nitrogen
21%
oxygen
average surface
temperature 20°C
 
■Figure A2.1.1 The atmosphere of the early Earth and the atmosphere today


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
36
Cells as the smallest units of self-sustaining life
Cells are the fundamental self-sustaining units of life that reproduce via cell division. All present-day 
cells are believed to have evolved from a common ancestral cell that existed around 4 billion years ago.   
All cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane that separates the inside of the cell from its 
environment. All cells contain DNA to store genetic information and use it as a template for the 
synthesis of RNA molecules and proteins.
The identification of cellular life processes, e.g., respiration, nutrition, reproduction and so on (see 
also page 73), does not define life and it does not explain how life appeared. The three principles 
below can be used to define life:
l	 Living organisms must be able to evolve through natural selection. This requires them to be able 
to reproduce and have a hereditary system that must show genetic variation. 
l	 Life forms are contained and separate from, but in communication with, their surrounding 
environment, like a cell. 
l	 Life forms are chemical and physical ‘machines’ that receive and respond to information.
There is also a need to take a systems approach and not just to view life as simply a large set of 
biochemical reactions at the molecular level. Systems biologists view living organisms as complex 
systems that process information about themselves and their environment. 
NASA’s working definition of life is: ‘life is a self-sustaining chemical system capable of Darwinian 
evolution’. This definition of ‘life’ would include viruses, but many of the problems in attempting to 
define life are because there is only one example – life on Earth – where all the organisms have the 
same basic biochemistry. It is therefore difficult to distinguish which properties of life on Earth are 
unique and which are needed in a general sense to qualify as ‘life’. The most promising place for life 
in our solar system is probably Mars since it may have sub-surface pockets of water.
However, some scientists have proposed that life could evolve on other planets in the universe using 
a liquid other than water, e.g., ammonia. If these hypothetical organisms existed, they might be 
described as ‘weird life’ because they would have to be fundamentally different from terrestrial life. 
Viruses are regarded as non-living. Viruses are non-cellular and therefore lack organelles to carry 
out metabolism independently, e.g., releasing energy in the form of ATP (see page 67) and protein 
synthesis. They can only replicate inside living cells using their cellular components.
However, viruses do have some features of living organisms. They do not respond to stimuli from their 
surroundings and do not exhibit homeostasis (the keeping of internal conditions within narrow limits, 
such as temperature), but they do respond to external stimuli, such as evading immunity, adapting to 
drug treatment (with antivirals) or changing host range by mutation (especially RNA viruses). 
Viruses contain hereditary material in the form of nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) with genes that 
code for specific structures, e.g. capsid coat proteins, and reverse transcriptase and integrase 
(for retroviruses).
The genomes of viruses are prone to rapid mutation and are one factor in the evolution of viruses by 
natural selection. Many viruses can engage in a form of recombination known as genetic shift.
The spontaneous origin of cells
Cells are consistent across all biological systems and are highly complex structures that can currently 
only be produced by the division of pre-existing cells. However, the first cells must have had non-
biotic (non-biological) origins, and one of the most important questions in biology is how did these 
first cells evolve? Answers may be found by looking at the features of cells and then considering how 
they first evolved and appeared.
Link
Plasma membranes 
are covered in detail 
in Chapter B2.1, 
page 223.
Link
Natural selection is 
covered in Chapters 
A4.1, page 140, and 
D4.1, page 779.
Link
For more on 
Darwinian evolution, 
see Chapter A4.1, 
page 140.
Link
Viruses are covered 
in detail in Chapter 
A2.3, page 88.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
37
All cells have three common features:
1	 a stable, partially permeable membrane that surrounds cell components
2	 genetic material that can be passed on when new cells are formed, and which controls the 
function and behaviour of cells
3	 metabolic processes that allow energy generation, enabling growth, self-maintenance 
and reproduction.
In biology, the term ‘evolution’ specifically means the processes that have transformed life 
on Earth from its earliest beginnings to the diversity of forms we know about today, living 
and extinct. It is an organizing principle of modern biology. It helps us make sense of the 
ways living things are related to each other, for example.
The evolution of life in geological time has involved major steps – none more so than 
the origin of the first cells. Unless these first cells arrived here from somewhere else 
in the universe, they must have arisen from non-living materials, starting from the 
components of the Earth’s atmosphere at the time. We can only speculate about these 
very first steps.
Concept: Diversity
The common features of all cells have allowed a large diversity of forms to 
evolve over a period of some 4 billion years.
Following on from the discussion above, the formation of living cells from non-living materials 
would have required the following steps:
l	 the synthesis of simple organic molecules, such as sugars and amino acids
l	 the assembly of these molecules into polymers (page 39)
l	 the development of self-replicating molecules, such as the nucleic acids
l	 the retention of these molecules within membranous sacs, so that an internal chemistry 
developed, different from the surrounding environment. 
As well as the features shown in Figure A2.1.3, and the processes listed above, these elements must 
have spontaneously self-assembled to form the first cells. 
Nature of science: Hypotheses 
The origin and the evolution of the earliest cells are among the most intriguing topics being 
debated in the scientific community. Traditionally, two approaches have been used to understand 
how life on the Earth originated. The bottom-up approach, favoured by chemists, for example 
Miller’s experiment (see Figure A2.1.4, page 39), attempts to reconstruct the conditions of primitive 
Earth. The top-down approach is favoured by biologists, who study modern organisms to find the 
relics of their ancestors to reconstruct ancient metabolic pathways and molecular processes.
However, knowledge about evolutionary history is not restricted to perfectly replicating a point in 
the geological past or finding fossils. Biologists interested in chemical evolution or the emergence 
of the first protocell can carry out experiments to test the mechanisms upon which a theory rests 
– and can do so in laboratory conditions that match what scientists do know about conditions 
that likely existed somewhere on the pre-biotic Earth. However, one of the problems of testing 
hypotheses in this way is that the exact conditions on pre-biotic Earth cannot be replicated. 
This approach can be illustrated for the three main competing theories for the origin of life.
Genetic
material
Membrane
compartment
Metabolic
processes
LIFE
 
■Figure A2.1.3 Three factors 
essential for sustaining life
3	 List the three 
common features 
shared by all cells. 
4	 Outline the steps 
that would be 
needed for the 
formation of living 
cells from non-
living materials.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
38
 
■The three competing theories for the origin of life
1 Protocell-first
A cell-like compartment that had a basic metabolism but lacked a fully developed genetic system; 
it arose spontaneously with the ability to grow and then divide into daughters that tended to 
resemble the mother cell. These protocells evolved adaptively until they eventually acquired a 
genetic system (likely RNA, then later DNA). 
Sample prediction: cell-like units capable of growing and dividing without genetic molecules could 
be engineered or, better still, be seen to arise spontaneously in the laboratory under controlled 
conditions. The exact nature of the earliest cells would be difficult to prove, however, because the 
first protocells did not fossilize.
2 Gene-first
A genetic molecule (thought to be RNA) or a small set of genetic molecules arose spontaneously, 
capable of replication. The replicators evolved adaptively by natural selection, forming genetic 
variants that could assemble a cell membrane and start metabolising. 
Sample predictions: a context could be found in which complex RNA molecules form spontaneously; 
spontaneously arising RNAs can show collective self-replication and open-ended evolution.
3 Metabolism-first
A self-sustaining system of simple reactions, capable of feeding on nutrients and energy arose 
spontaneously, perhaps adsorbed on to a mineral surface. The chemical mixture evolved adaptively, 
eventually evolving cells (perhaps via selection for dispersal) and genetic systems (perhaps via 
selection for catalysis of metabolic reactions). 
Sample predictions: chemical mixtures given a flux of nutrients/energy in the laboratory should 
sometimes demonstrate autocatalysis and show evidence of adaptive evolution; autocatalytic reaction 
systems can produce lipids and genetic polymers.
Many scientists favour the metabolism-first theory because rapid growth, replication and division, 
which are essential processes for protocells’ evolution, all require significant amounts of energy.
TOK
Knowledge that is beyond the capability of science is perhaps knowledge that we do not have 
the technology to discover at this current moment in time. Although it is possible to investigate 
the origin of the first cells, this is not something that can be verified as it is not possible to check 
whether the hypotheses are true. The validity of hypotheses regarding the origin of life can only be 
tested by accumulating evidence that supports a particular theory. What knowledge, if any, is likely 
to always remain beyond the capabilities of science to investigate or verify?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Evidence for the origin of carbon compounds
The molecules that make up living things are built mainly from carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, with 
some nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur; a small number of other elements are also present (metals 
and their ions are very important in living organisms). Today, living things make these molecules by 
the action of enzymes in their cells, but for life to originate from non-living material, the first step 
was the non-living synthesis of simple organic molecules.
	
◆Protocell: pre-cellular 
or cell-like entity, e.g. a 
lipid droplet with a few 
molecules inside.
Top tip! 
Claims in science, 
including hypotheses 
and theories, must be 
testable. In some cases, 
scientists struggle 
with hypotheses that 
are difficult to test. 
In this case, the exact 
conditions on pre-
biotic Earth cannot 
be replicated and the 
first protocells did not 
fossilize. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
39
SL Miller and HC Urey (1953) investigated how simple 
organic molecules might have arisen from the chemicals 
present on Earth before there was life. They used a reaction 
vessel in which specific environmental conditions could 
be reproduced (Figure A2.1.4). For example, strong electric 
sparks (simulating lightning) were passed through mixtures of 
methane, ammonia, hydrogen and water vapour for a period 
of time. They discovered that amino acids (some known 
components of cell proteins) were formed naturally, as well as 
other compounds.
This approach confirmed that organic molecules can be 
synthesized outside cells, in the absence of oxygen. 
The experiment has subsequently been repeated, sometimes 
using different gaseous mixtures and other sources of energy 
(ultraviolet radiation, in particular), in similar apparatus. 
The products have included amino acids, fatty acids and sugars 
such as glucose. In addition, nucleotide bases have been 
formed and, in some cases, simple polymers of all these 
molecules have been found. So, we can see how it is possible 
that a wide range of organic compounds could have formed on 
the pre-biotic Earth, including some of the building blocks of 
the cells of organisms.
	ATL A2.1A 
Carry out further research into Stanley Miller and Harold Urey’s work on synthesizing organic 
molecules in a pre-biotic world: www.dnaftb.org/26/animation.html
What first led Urey and Miller to study the origin of life on Earth? What research came before 
them, and what work followed their discoveries?
 
■Assembly of the polymers of living organisms
For polymers to be assembled in the absence of cells and enzymes would have required a 
concentration of biologically important molecules such as monosaccharides (simple sugars – the 
building blocks for polysaccharides), amino acids (building blocks for proteins) and fatty acids (for 
lipid synthesis). They would need to come together in ‘pockets’ where further chemical reactions 
between them were possible. Clays have been shown to be important in the polymerization of 
monomers – they promote phosphodiester bond formation (see page 18) by binding and 
concentrating nucleotides. Microscopic layers of clay may have played a similar role in the formation 
of the first polyribonucleotides. This might have happened in water close to lava flows from 
volcanoes or at the vents of submarine volcanoes where the environment is hot, the pressure is high 
and the gases being vented are often rich in sulfur compounds (e.g. H2S) and other compounds. 
There is some evidence for the latter (see page 47).
TOK
To what extent can you 
argue that Miller and 
Urey’s experimental 
response to a 
seemingly insoluble 
issue was a uniquely 
scientific response?
	
◆Polymerization: 
process by which 
relatively small molecules, 
called monomers, 
combine chemically to 
produce a larger molecule 
called a polymer.
possible atmospheric
gases introduced, e.g.
CH4, NH3, H2
steam (H2O)
boiling
water
stopcock for
removing
samples
heat
cooling
condenser
spark from electrodes
simulates lightning
Apparatus like this has been used with various gases to investigate 
the organic molecules that may be synthesized.
 
■Figure A2.1.4 Apparatus for simulating early chemical evolution


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
40
 
■Evaluating the Miller–Urey experiment
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Evaluating
An evaluation is an important procedure towards the end of a scientific investigation. 
Did you demonstrate your hypothesis? What were the limitations and strengths of the 
investigation? How could you improve the experiment? What else could you measure 
or change?
When commenting on limitations, consider the procedures, the equipment, the use of 
equipment, the quality of the data (for example, their accuracy and precision) and the 
relevance of the data. To what extent may the limitations have affected the results? 
Propose realistic improvements that address the limitations.
	
◆Evaluation: make an 
appraisal by weighing 
up the strengths and 
limitations.
	
◆Accuracy: how 
close to the true value a 
result is.
	
◆Precision: describes 
the reproducibility of 
repeated measurements 
of the same quantity and 
how close they are to 
each other.
The conditions of the Miller–Urey experiment were believed at the time (1953) to simulate the 
atmosphere of early Earth, which was assumed to be reducing (hydrogen rich) and rich in methane. 
However, current thinking is that methane was in low abundance in the early atmosphere (except 
perhaps for brief periods), with carbon largely in the form of carbon dioxide (oxygen rich). Also, the 
Miller–Urey experiment used electrical discharges rather than UV light to simulate high-energy 
input into the early Earth system. However, organic molecules such as amino acids and bases are 
generated when carbon dioxide, nitrogen and water are subjected to ionizing (nuclear) radiation and 
ultraviolet light, as well as electrical discharges.
Despite the success of the experiments of Miller and Urey, efforts to reproduce the conditions of 
pre-biotic chemistry have not until recently succeeded in generating nucleotides. Nucleotides have 
now been chemically synthesized via a new approach involving four simple organic molecules – 
cyanamide, cyanoacetylene, glycolaldehyde and glyceraldehyde – that are readily produced under 
reasonable pre-biotic conditions. 
Spontaneous formation of vesicles
All cells are made from membranes that separate genetic material and chemical reactants in 
metabolic processes from the external environment. It is likely that the earliest cells, or protocells, 
were formed from basic membranes. 
But how did these protocells form?
Fatty acids are likely to have formed the components of protocell membranes because they are 
amphipathic, which means that they have a polar end that is attracted to water and a non-polar end 
that is repelled by it. Scientists have shown that if a few lipid molecules are in water, they form a 
monolayer on the surface of water and, with more lipid present, bilayers form. Lengths of these 
bilayers are likely to have formed microspheres (Figure A2.1.5) or very small vesicles. Vesicles 
therefore form spontaneously (i.e. without an external cause or stimulus) by coalescence of fatty acids 
into spherical bilayers.
Perhaps simple microspheres, surrounding a portion of a pre-biotic ‘soup’ of polymers and 
monomers, were the forerunners of cells. These may have formed membrane systems with 
a distinctive internal chemistry, as they developed a chemical environment different from 
their surroundings.
	
◆Amphipathic: a 
molecule that has two 
different affinities – a 
polar end that is attracted 
to water and a non-polar 
end that is repelled by it.
	
◆Microsphere: a 
microscopic hollow 
sphere made from a lipid 
bilayer.
	
◆Vesicle: membrane-
bound sac.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
41
lipid
bilayer
mineral surface
microsphere formed
1
3
2
 
■Figure A2.1.5 Steps in the formation of microspheres
Cell membranes are made from modified lipids, called phospholipids, which have structures with 
hydrophobic tails and hydrophilic heads. It is likely that fatty acids rather than phospholipids formed 
the first membranes as they are chemically simpler than phospholipids.
The evolution of cell membranes, from primitive to more modern, may therefore have followed the 
following pathway:
l	 Protocells formed from fatty acids. Fatty acids are extremely stable compounds and may have 
accumulated to significant levels on the early Earth.
l	 Condensation of fatty acids with glycerol to form triglycerides, a highly stabilizing membrane 
component.
l	 Phosphorylation (the addition of a phosphate to the triglyceride) forms the simplest phospholipid.
RNA as a presumed first genetic material
For the evolution of life from a mixture of polymers and their monomers, two special situations need 
to emerge:
l	 a ‘self-replication’ system
l	 an ability to catalyse chemical change.
Today in living cells these essential situations are achieved by DNA, the home of the genetic code, and 
enzymes, which are typically large, globular proteins (see Chapter C1.1, page 380). However, neither 
of these have been synthesized in any experiments that repeat Miller and Urey’s demonstration of 
how biologically important molecules might have been synthesized in the pre-biotic world.
So what may have filled the roles of DNA and enzymes in the origin of life?
A likely answer came as a by-product of a genetic engineering experiment, investigating the enzymes 
needed to join short lengths of RNA. It was discovered that RNA, as well as being information 
molecules, may also function as enzymes. Perhaps short lengths of RNA combined the roles of 
information molecules and enzymes in the evolution of life itself. 
In Chapter A1.2, we explored the structure of RNA and its similarities and differences to DNA. 
We have also seen how hydrogen bonds between adjacent bases confer stability in DNA molecules. 
Messenger RNA (mRNA) is clearly a simpler molecule than DNA (it is single stranded rather than 
double stranded), and hydrogen bonds can occur between nucleotides in the same chain, causing 
RNA to fold up in a unique way, determined by its nucleotide sequence. This folding can confer 
enzymatic properties on the RNA – a property that would have been needed in the earliest forms of 
life. This is known as the RNA world hypothesis.
Link
Phospholipids and 
cell membranes are 
covered in detail 
in Chapters B1.1, 
page 202, and B2.1, 
page 223.
	
◆RNA world: 
hypothesis that proposes 
that the earliest life forms 
(protocells) may have used 
RNA alone for the storage 
of genetic material.
Concept: Unity
As nucleic acid is in 
all living organisms, 
this suggests a 
means by which 
the first cells arose.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
42
 
■The RNA world
The central dogma of molecular biology is that DNA makes RNA, which makes protein 
(Figure A2.1.6). Nucleic acids are required for protein synthesis, but proteins are required to 
synthesize nucleic acids. This makes it difficult to see how this interdependent system could have 
evolved by natural selection.
nucleotides
RNA
Transcription
RNA synthesis
Translation
protein synthesis
DNA
Met
Arg
Val
Thr
Leu
Phe
Leu
Met
Arg
Val
Thr
Leu
Phe
Leu
amino acid
sequence
 
■Figure A2.1.6 The central dogma showing flow of information from DNA to mRNA to proteins
One view is that an RNA world existed in protocells before modern cells containing DNA and 
proteins. According to the RNA world hypothesis, RNA is now an intermediate between genes and 
proteins, but it stored genetic information and catalyzed chemical reactions in protocells. Only later 
in evolutionary time did DNA take over as the genetic material and proteins become the major 
catalysts and structural components of modern cells.
However, there still appear to be relics of the RNA world in modern cells. RNA primers (short nucleic 
acid sequences) are used in eukaryotic DNA replication, and ribosomal RNA appears to be involved 
in the catalysis of peptide bond formation in the ribosome. RNA molecules that have catalytic 
properties are known as ribozymes. These molecules have a unique folded three-dimensional shape 
that acts as an active site. In 1989, Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman were awarded the Nobel Prize 
in Chemistry for the discovery of catalytic RNA.
The unique potential of RNA molecules to act both as carriers of genetic information and as catalysts 
is thought to have enabled them to have a central role in the origin of life. Although self-replicating 
systems of RNA molecules have not been found in nature, scientists are attempting to synthesize 
them in the laboratory.
Evidence that RNA arose before DNA in evolution can be found in the chemical differences between 
them in their pentose sugars. Ribose present in RNA is readily formed from methanal (H2CO), 
which is one of the principal products of the Miller–Urey experiment (page 39). In modern cells, 
deoxyribose is produced from ribose in a reaction catalyzed by a protein-based enzyme.
	
◆Central dogma: the 
idea that the transfer of 
genetic information from 
DNA of the chromosome 
to mRNA to protein 
(amino acid sequence) is 
irreversible.
Top tip!
The idea that 
information always 
flows in this direction 
(DNA to RNA to 
protein) in cells was 
called the central 
dogma of cell biology, 
implying it was always 
the case. However, in 
retroviruses such as HIV 
(see Chapters A2.3 and 
C3.2), the information 
in RNA in the 
cytoplasm is translated 
into DNA within a host 
cell and then becomes 
attached to the DNA of 
a chromosome in the 
host’s nucleus.
	
◆Ribozyme: RNA 
molecule capable of 
acting as an enzyme.
	ATL A2.1B 
Crick’s original 
formulation of the 
central dogma was: 
‘Once information has 
got into a protein it 
cannot get out again.’
What did he mean by 
this statement and 
how does it allow for 
reverse transcription, 
retroviruses and other 
biological phenomena? 
Read about Crick’s 
ideas here: www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC5602739


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
43
The other differences between RNA and DNA, the stable double helix of DNA and the use of the 
base thymine rather than uracil, further increase DNA’s chemical stability by making the molecule 
easier to repair by enzymes.
The basic chemical reaction of the ribosome – joining together amino acids from an RNA template 
– is ultimately catalysed by RNA. This is perhaps even stronger evidence for the RNA world than 
the more generalized ability of RNA to act as a catalyst of various reactions, as it is consistent with 
the idea that protein synthesis could have first been developed in a pre-protein world, using an RNA 
enzyme (the early ribosome) to make the proteins from an RNA template. 
The RNA world hypothesis has been an important paradigm shift in the scientific study of life’s 
origins. Although this concept does not fully explain how life originated, it has helped to guide 
scientific thinking and has served to focus experimental efforts. 
TOK
The concept that RNA can have both informational and functional roles, and that ribozymes can 
act as catalysts for chemical reactions between other RNA molecules, represented a paradigm shift 
in how scientists viewed the evolution of early life. The RNA world hypothesis provided a means by 
which the first nucleic acids could have developed and the role they played in the first cells.
What role do paradigm shifts play in the progression of scientific knowledge?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Hadean
Archaean
billions of years
pre-RNA world
RNA world
first DNA/protein
life
hydrosphere
(total mass of water
found on Earth’s surface)
formation
of Earth
pre-biotic
chemistry
4.5
4.2
4.2 to 4.0
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.6 to present
diversification
of life
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
 
■Figure A2.1.7 Geological timeline for the early Earth and the appearance of life; the sequence 
of events shows the formation of Earth through the Hadean eon and into the Archaean eon, and 
the corresponding events in the origin of life according to the RNA world hypothesis
Top tip!
RNA can be replicated and also has some catalytic activity so may have acted initially as both the 
genetic material and the enzymes of the earliest cells. 
Evidence for a last universal common ancestor 
Fossil remains and other evidence (such as anatomical and biochemical similarities) provide 
evidence about how species are related. The skeletons of the apes, for example, show that the gibbon, 
gorilla, chimpanzee, orang-utan and human are related and share a common ancestor (an ancestor 
species they all share), and suggest how evolution by natural selection has allowed them to adapt to 
different environments and lifestyles.
Top tip!
Catalysis, self-
replication of 
molecules, self-
assembly and the 
emergence of 
compartmentalization 
were necessary 
requirements for 
the evolution of the 
first cells.
5	 Describe two 
properties of RNA 
which may have 
contributed to the 
origin of life.
	
◆Common ancestor: 
the most recent species 
from which two or more 
different species have 
evolved.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
44
DNA can be used to determine similarities and differences between species. Species with very 
similar genes will be closely related, whereas those with very different DNA will be only distantly 
related. As we have already discussed, all life on Earth is related to each other and, ultimately, we all 
share a common ancestor, which is believed to have existed some 4 billion years ago. This organism 
is therefore the evolutionary link between the abiotic phase of Earth’s history and the biotic phase. 
This organism is known as LUCA, which stands for ‘Last Universal Common Ancestor’. If all life on 
Earth is represented as a tree, LUCA is the organism at the base of the tree (Figure A2.1.8). There is 
an unbroken line of descent from us to LUCA. All organisms share the same biochemistry, the same 
bases in DNA and the same shared amino acids. The shared genetic code of (most) organisms – the 
code for translating RNA to protein – is very good evidence for common ancestry, since multiple 
codes would be possible if different lineages somehow independently evolved protein synthesis.
* The shortest branches lead to 
hyperthermophilic species, which 
suggests that the universal 
ancestor of all living things was 
a hyperthermophile (possibly 
‘assembled’ at deep ocean vents 
where volcanic gases are 
discharged into water at high
temperature and pressure).
These evolutionary relationships have been established 
by comparing the sequence of bases (nucleotides) in the 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) present in species of each group.
Bacteria
(eubacteria)
Archaea
(archaeabacteria)
Eukarya
(eukaryotes)
slime
moulds
animals
fungi
plants
ciliates
flagellates
LUCA
*
*
*
*
We have already discussed how the genetic code is universal (see Theme A1.2, page 14). The genetic 
code of all life on Earth contains a record of the origin and evolution of DNA through time, and the 
proteins for which it forms the ‘blueprint’. Scientists have analysed DNA from modern bacteria (the 
eubacteria) and from two archaea (a separate group of extremophile prokaryotes, which can live in 
extreme environments such as deep ocean vents, in high-temperature habitats such as geysers, in salt 
pans, in acidic conditions and in polar environments) and searched for genes shared by them as an 
indicator of genes that were inherited from a common ancestor. Researchers searched DNA 
databanks, analysing the genomes of 2000 modern microbes sequenced over two decades: 355 gene 
families were discovered that were widespread among the bacteria from six million total genes, 
which means they were likely to be genes passed down from LUCA. Care was taken by researchers 
to eliminate genes that could have been transferred between bacteria laterally (through processes 
such as conjugation – the process by which one bacterium transfers genetic material to another 
through direct contact – see page 119) rather than by descent. Genomic analysis was then used to 
predict the likely structure and function of LUCA (given that DNA codes for proteins, and that 
proteins determine the structure and function of organisms). This analysis is discussed below 
(page 47).
It is likely that other forms of life evolved at the same time as LUCA but then became extinct by 
competing for common resources, making LUCA the surviving organism from which all species 
evolved. It is also likely that descendants of LUCA also competed with species that subsequently 
became extinct, shaping the tree of life that we see today.
Concept: Unity
All living organisms 
can be related to a 
universal common 
ancestor, from 
which the tree of 
life arose.
 
■Figure A2.1.8 The phylogenetic 
tree of life; all organisms are 
related to a Last Universal 
Common Ancestor (LUCA) 
Common 
mistake
LUCA should not 
be referred to as a 
‘protocell’. The term 
protocell refers to a 
pre-cellular or cell-
like entity (e.g. a lipid 
droplet with a few 
molecules inside; 
something much less 
elaborate than, for 
example, the ancestral 
prokaryote). 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
45
	ATL A2.1C 
Figure A2.1.8 shows the three-domain ‘model’ of life. Recent research has suggested that a 
‘two‑domain’ model may better reflect the evolution of life on Earth. This is illustrated in this 
journal paper: www.nature.com/articles/nmicrobiol2016116
Find out about the two-domain tree of life. How does it relate to what you know about the origin 
of the first cells, for example the endosymbiont theory, page 83, Chapter A2.2?
This 2017 article: Looking for LUCA, the Last Universal Common Ancestor is a good starting point: 
https://astrobiology.nasa.gov/news/looking-for-luca-the-last-universal-common-ancestor
TOK
What is the role of imagination and intuition in the creation  
of hypotheses in the natural sciences?
Science is creative in a similar way to art, music or literature. 
Scientists must use their imagination to formulate a hypothesis 
– that is, a testable scientific explanation. 
Although imagination, faith and intuition (guiding a scientist in 
one particular direction) may be used in developing hypotheses 
and theories about the origin of cells, the validity of scientific 
arguments must eventually be tested by experimentation or, if 
that is not possible, simulation. 
Biologists may often disagree about the choice of 
methodology and the value and importance of specific data, 
or about the appropriateness of particular assumptions and 
simplifications that are made – and therefore disagree about 
what conclusions are justified. However, they tend to agree 
about the principles of logical reasoning that connect evidence 
(data) and assumptions with conclusions.
What differentiates the natural sciences from other knowledge 
is subjecting hypotheses to empirical testing by observing 
whether predictions derived from a hypothesis are confirmed 
from relevant observations and, if possible, experiments. 
According to Karl Popper, a hypothesis is scientific if there is 
possibility of falsification.
The central hypothesis regarding the origin of the cell is that 
organic molecules self-assembled within a vesicle to form the 
first protocell (Figure A2.1.9) approximately 4 billion years ago.
Biologists have focused on four critical processes: the 
formation of organic molecules such as amino acids and 
nucleic acids (especially RNA), the polymerization of these 
molecules, the formation of membranes, and the development 
of metabolic pathways for energy transfer. 
hydrophilic
head group
water
hydrophobic
tail
phospholipid
membrane
RNA
water
inside
outside
phospholipid
molecules
 

➜
 
■Figure A2.1.9 A possible protocell consisting of 
self-replicating RNA and proteins within a lipid vesicle


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
46
Competing theories exist for how each of these processes 
evolved, and in what sequence. Although there is a scientific 
consensus that organic molecules came first via chemical 
evolution, views differ between scientists over whether 
metabolism, polymerized molecules (nucleic acids and proteins) 
or membranes then evolved.
For example, the ‘iron–sulfur world’ model was initially 
proposed as a hypothesis without experimental testing. The 
hypothesis postulated that the first steps in polymerization 
and protocell formation would take place in a hot and 
high-pressure (several kilometres under the sea) iron–sulfur 
hydrothermal environment under the sea. 
The hypothesis gained support after the discovery of sub-
ocean hydrothermal vents, but experimental designs to test 
it have been hampered by the challenges of simulating high 
pressures and temperatures in the laboratory.
We still do not know how life originated on the Earth, and 
we will possibly never know, since scientists are studying a 
historical problem for which critical evidence and data may 
have completely disappeared. The lack of sources forces 
scientists to imagine and then reconstruct and test the events 
that could have happened.
Estimating the dates of the first 
living cells and LUCA
Life has been evolving on Earth over an immense length of time. LUCA may have existed some 
4 billion years ago, some 560 million years after the creation of the Earth. But how have scientists 
determined the age of the first life?
We learn something about the history of life from the evidence found in fossils. Fossilization is an 
extremely rare, chance event. Predators, scavengers and bacterial action normally break down dead 
plant and animal structures before they can be fossilized. Of the relatively few fossils formed, most 
remain buried or, if they do become exposed, are overlooked or accidentally destroyed. Bacteria are 
known to have been fossilized in rock.
Nevertheless, numerous fossils have been found and more continue to be discovered all the 
time. If the fossil, or the rock that surrounds it, can be accurately dated (using radiometric dating 
techniques), we have good evidence of the history of life. Radiometric dating measures the amounts 
of naturally occurring radioactive substances such carbon-14 (in relation to the amount of carbon-12), 
or the ratio of potassium-40 to argon-40.
Older rocks will contain more ancient groups of organisms. It can be expected that the oldest rocks 
on the planet (providing they allowed for fossilization to take place and biological remains were not 
destroyed by geological forces, for example in metamorphic rock where great pressure and heat create 
extreme conditions where fossils cannot survive) will contain evidence of the oldest life on Earth.
Genomic analysis also offers techniques to establish the age of ancient organisms. Changes occur in 
DNA over time. These gene mutations provide the key to estimating dates of the first living cells and 
the last universal common ancestor. By estimating the average time for mutations to take place, and 
then extrapolating this back through time, the dates when organisms shared a common ancestor can 
be estimated. Similarly, the amino acid composition of proteins can be used in a similar way, because 
change to the genetic code leads to alteration of protein composition and structure.
Biochemical changes, like those discussed above, may occur at a constant rate and, if so, may be 
used as a ‘molecular clock’. If the rate of change can be reliably estimated, it does record the time 
that has passed between the separation of evolutionary lines. By examining the changes in specific 
genes common to first life and species alive today, the molecular clock can be used to estimate when 
these genes converged in a common ancestor, and the rate of biochemical change used to estimate 
the time over which these changes would have occurred, giving a date for the earliest life on Earth.
Top tip!
Fossils in a rock 
layer (stratum) that 
has been accurately 
dated give us clues 
to the community of 
organisms living at a 
particular time in the 
past (although this is 
an incomplete picture). 
The fossil record 
may also suggest the 
sequence in which 
groups of species 
evolved and the timing 
of the appearance of 
the major groups.
Link
The molecular clock is 
discussed further on 
page 130.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.1   Origins of cells
47
Evidence for the evolution of LUCA
Given that LUCA probably evolved in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, rocks formed by ancient seafloor 
hydrothermal vent precipitates are the most likely to contain fossils of first life. 
Scientists have found fossilized evidence of bacteria from ancient seafloor hydrothermal vent 
precipitates from the Nuvvuagittuq Greenstone Belt in Quebec, Canada. Rock was cut into 
hundredth-of-a-millimetre slices and examined under a light microscope. These sedimentary rocks 
contained structures similar to those produced by modern bacteria found at hydrothermal vents. 
The fossils have been dated to at least 3.77 billion years old, but could be up to 4.28 billion years old, 
making them the oldest fossil remains to be found to date, indicating that these are some of the first 
cells to have existed on the Earth.
The fossil structures are very small, around half the width of human hair. They are tubes made of 
haematite, the mineral form of iron(iii) oxide (Figure A2.1.10). They are like filamentous microbes 
from modern hydrothermal vent precipitates. The Nuvvuagittuq rocks also contain carbonate and 
carbonaceous material, which provides supporting evidence of oxidation and biological activity. 
Iron-oxidizing microbial communities, which take iron atoms out of the water and remove electrons 
from it for energy transfer within metabolism, can currently be found associated with widespread 
hydrothermal vents at the ocean floor. It is likely that the bacteria found in the Nuvvuagittuq rock 
formation had a similar biochemistry. While different to the metabolism indicated for LUCA, the 
environment found at deep-sea hydrothermal vents provides many opportunities for diverse forms of 
energy generation using chemosynthetic pathways.
LUCA would have contained conserved genes that are present 
in all cells. Genetic sequences for conserved genes typically 
involve proteins associated with ribosomes, where the genetic 
code is translated into proteins. Because protein synthesis 
is the most energy-intensive activity of a cell (around 75% of 
a cell’s ATP is used for protein synthesis) these conserved 
genes tell us that LUCA released and used energy. These 
universal conserved sequences from genomic analysis do not 
tell scientists the metabolic nature of this first ancestor, and so 
other techniques are needed.
The 355 protein families determined from the genetic analysis 
discussed above are not distributed throughout all organisms, 
and so can be used to suggest the likely physiology of a 
possible LUCA. For example, LUCA contained a gene for 
making a protein called ‘reverse gyrase’ (an enzyme that helps 
maintain DNA’s structure and stability), which is found today 
in extremophiles existing in high-temperature environments 
including hydrothermal vents.
The properties and functions of these proteins indicate that LUCA had the following characteristics:
l	 anaerobic (survived without oxygen)
l	 CO2-fixing (converted carbon dioxide into glucose)
l	 H2-dependent (used molecular hydrogen as an energy source, rather than sunlight)
l	 N2-fixing (converted nitrogen into ammonia, for subsequent synthesis of amino acids) 
l	 thermophilic (survived in areas of very high temperature – up to 122 °C).
	
◆Chemosynthesis: 
inorganic molecules 
are oxidized to release 
energy; this energy 
is used to synthesize 
glucose.
	
◆Extremophile: an 
organism that lives in 
conditions of extreme 
temperature, acidity, 
alkalinity, salinity, 
pressure or chemical 
concentration.
 
■Figure A2.1.10 Haematite tubes found in Nuvvuagittuq – the 
remains of ancient bacteria, at least 3.77 billion years old


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
48
The analysis indicated that modern-day microbes with similar physiologies include Clostridia (an 
anaerobic bacteria found in soil and the intestines of humans and other animals) and methanogens 
(anaerobic bacteria that produce methane as a waste product).
The genes identified by scientists as being passed down from LUCA were those of an autotrophic 
(i.e. it can synthesize glucose) extremophile organism that probably lived in hydrothermal vents: 
areas where seawater and magma meet on the ocean floor (Figure A2.1.11). LUCA inhabited a 
geochemically active environment rich in hydrogen, carbon dioxide and iron. As discussed above, 
similar prokaryotic organisms still live in these environments, among the toxic plumes of sulfides 
and metals. Given the genetic analysis and recent fossil evidence, many researchers believe this is 
where life first began.
 
■Figure A2.1.11 A hydrothermal vent 
	ATL A2.1D 
Tardigrades are an example of an extremophile organism that can survive in the vacuum of 
space. Research this organism and find out about the range of conditions it can survive in. 
What physiological adaptations does it have to survive in such extreme environments? Start your 
reading here: https://serc.carleton.edu/microbelife/topics/tardigrade/index.html
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 For what reasons is heredity an essential feature of living things?
2	 What is needed for structures to be able to evolve by natural selection?
	
◆Autotrophic: 
synthesizing glucose 
from simple inorganic 
substances using an 
external source of energy.
6	 Explain why 
LUCA (the Last 
Universal Common 
Ancestor) is 
thought to be 
the evolutionary 
link between the 
abiotic phase of 
Earth’s history and 
the biotic phase.
