A2.2   Cell structure
49
A2.2
Cell structure
•	 What are the features common to all cells and the features that differ?
•	 How is microscopy used to investigate cell structure? 
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A2.2.1 	 Cells as the basic structural unit of all living organisms
	 A2.2.2 	 Microscopy skills
	 A2.2.3 	 Developments in microscopy
	 A2.2.4 	 Structures common to cells in all living organisms
	 A2.2.5 	 Prokaryote cell structure
	 A2.2.6 	 Eukaryote cell structure
	 A2.2.7 	 Processes of life in unicellular organisms
	 A2.2.8 	 Differences in eukaryotic cell structure between animals, fungi and plants
	 A2.2.9 	 Atypical cell structure in eukaryotes
	 A2.2.10 	Cell types and cell structures viewed in light and electron micrographs
	 A2.2.11 	Drawing and annotation based on electron micrographs
	 A2.2.12 	Origin of eukaryotic cells by endosymbiosis (HL only)
	 A2.2.13 	Cell differentiation as the process for developing specialized tissues in 
multicellular organisms (HL only)
	 A2.2.14 	Evolution of multicellularity (HL only)
Introduction to cells 
The cell is the basic structural unit of all living organisms – it is the smallest part of an organism that 
we can say is alive. It is cells that carry out the essential processes of life. We think of them as self-
contained units of structure and function.
Cells are extremely small – most are only visible as distinct structures when we use a microscope 
(although a few types of cell are just large enough to be seen by the naked eye).
Observations of cells were first reported over 300 years ago, following the early development of 
microscopes. You may have already used a light microscope to view living cells, such as the single-
celled organism Amoeba, shown in Figure A2.2.1.
Concept: Unity
All living organisms are made from cells. Some organisms are made of single cells (such 
as protists and bacteria) and others are multicellular (animals, plants and most fungi). 
In multicellular organisms, cells are the building blocks for tissues.
Common 
mistake
Students sometimes 
use the terms ‘cell’ and 
‘tissue’ as if they are 
synonymous (i.e. are 
the same thing) – this 
is not the case. Cells 
are the basic structural 
unit of all living 
organisms, whereas 
tissues are a collection 
of cells of similar 
structure and function.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
50
flagella
cytoplasm
light-sensitive
spot
chloroplast
nucleus
starch storage
Chlamydomonas – a motile, unicellular alga
of fresh water habitats rich in ammonium ions
length 30   m
pseudopodia
endoplasm
food vacuoles
contractile
 vacuole
plasma
membrane
clear ectoplasm
nucleus
cytoplasm
Amoeba – a protozoan of freshwater habitats
Escherichia coli – a bacterium found in the intestines
of animals, e.g. humans
cell wall
(oligosaccharides
+ amino acids)
plasma
membrane
cytoplasm plasmid
pili
circular
DNA
ribosomes
length 2.0   m
length 400   m
 
■Unicellular and multicellular organisms
Some organisms are made of a single cell and are known as unicellular. Examples of unicellular 
organisms are introduced in Figure A2.2.1. There are vast numbers of different unicellular organisms 
in the living world, many with very long evolutionary histories. One type of unicellular organism is in 
a kingdom called the Protoctista (such as Chlamydomonas and Amoeba in Figure A2.2.1 – organisms in 
this kingdom are referred to as protists) and another are the bacteria (Escherichia coli, Figure A2.2.1).
Other organisms are made of many cells and are known as multicellular organisms. Examples of 
multicellular organisms are mammals and flowering plants. 
Top tip!
Much of the biology in this book is about multicellular organisms and the processes that go on in 
these organisms. But remember, single-celled organisms carry out all the essential functions of life 
too, within a single cell.
 
■Cell theory
All organisms are composed of one or more cells. Cell theory includes the idea that cells are the unit 
of structure and function in living organisms. The cell theory states that:
l	 cells can only arise from pre-existing cells
l	 living organisms are composed of cells, which are the smallest unit of life
l	 organisms consisting of only one cell carry out all functions of life in that cell; cells perform life 
functions at some point in their existence.
Although most organisms conform to cell theory, there are exceptions (see page 78).
Many biologists contributed to the development of the cell theory. This concept evolved gradually 
in western Europe during the nineteenth century because of the steadily accelerating pace of 
developments in microscopy and biochemistry. 
 
■Figure A2.2.1 Introducing unicellular organization
	
◆Unicellular: consisting 
of a single cell (e.g. 
prokaryotes, protists and 
some fungi).
	
◆Protists: eukaryotes 
consisting of single-celled 
organisms.
	
◆Multicellular: 
consisting of many cells 
(e.g. animals, plants and 
most fungi).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
51
 
■Cell size
Since cells are so small, we need appropriate units to measure them. The metre (symbol m) is the 
standard unit of length used in science (it is an internationally agreed unit, or SI unit). 
Look at Table A2.2.1, showing the subdivisions of the metre that are used to measure cells and their contents. 
These units are listed in descending order of size. You will see that each subdivision is one 
thousandth of the unit above it. The smallest units are probably quite new to you; they may take 
some getting used to.
So, the dimensions of cells are expressed in the unit called a micrometre or micron (μm). Notice 
this unit is one thousandth (10–3) of a millimetre. This gives us a clear idea about how small cells are 
when compared to the millimetre, which you can see on a standard ruler.
Bacteria are really small, typically 0.1–2 μm in size, whereas the cells of plants and animals are 
often in the range of 50–150 μm or larger. In fact, the lengths of the unicellular organisms shown in 
Figure A2.2.1 are approximately:
Escherichia coli	
2 μm
Chlamydomonas	 30 μm
Amoeba	
400 μm (but its shape and, therefore, length varies greatly).
Cell size determines the rate of diffusion of substances across the plasma membrane; by being small, 
this rate is maximized (see Chapter B2.3, page 260).
Table A2.2.2 shows the average sizes of cells and their components in decreasing size. The organelles 
and other structures that are found in cells are discussed in detail later in this chapter (pages 63–73).
 
■Table A2.2.2 The size of cells and their components
Cell and component
Diameter
Cell component
Diameter
plant cell
40 µm (average)
lysosome
0.2–0.5 µm
animal cell
20 µm (average)
centriole
0.15 µm
nucleus
10–20 µm
microtubule
24 nm
chloroplast
5–10 µm
ribosome
20 nm
bacterium
1 µm
microfilament
7 nm
mitochondrion
0.5–1.5 µm
DNA molecule
2 nm
Nature of science: Theories
Collecting and analysing biological observations can lead to important conclusions based on 
inductive reasoning. Induction involves formulating generalisations from many related specific 
observations (see page 32).
The claim of cell theory that ‘all organisms will consist of one or more cells’ is derived from inductive 
reasoning. This was based on microscopic observations by many biologists in a wide range of 
organisms. In inductive reasoning, biologists begin with specific observations and measurements and 
then detect patterns or common features. They may then formulate a hypothesis that can be tested, 
and finally develop a theory.
A related process known as deductive reasoning is used to test the theories, such as cell theory, 
produced by induction. Deductive reasoning proceeds from the more general to the more specific. 
This ultimately leads biologists to test the hypotheses with specific data that either support or falsify 
the theory.
The philosopher Karl Popper rejected the use of inductive reasoning in science, claiming that for 
induction to be true, every example of its inference must be true. Biologist have found that there are 
a small number of cells and organisms that are exceptions to the cell theory (page 78). However, cell 
theory remains an important and unifying concept in biology, necessary for inductive science.
➜
 
■Table A2.2.1 Units of 
length used in microscopy
1 metre (m) =  
1000 millimetres (mm)
1 mm (10−3 m) =  
1000 micrometres (μm) 
(or microns)
1 μm (10−6 m) =  
1000 nanometres (nm)
1	 Calculate how 
many cells of 
100 μm diameter 
will fit side by side 
along a millimetre.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
52
Induction and deduction are important types 
of logical reasoning and both contribute 
to the construction of scientific knowledge 
(Figure A2.2.2). Inductive reasoning is a form 
of logic directly opposite to that of deductive 
reasoning. Inductive reasoning is covered in 
Chapter A1.2, page 32.
Deductive
reasoning
Inductive
reasoning
Paradigm/theory
Predictions
Generalizations
Observation/experiment
 
■Figure A2.2.2 Inductive and deductive 
reasoning in the scientific method
Microscopy skills
 
■Examining cells and recording structure and size
We use microscopes to magnify the cells of biological specimens in order to view them. 
Figure A2.2.3 shows two types of light microscope.
using the simple microscope (hand lens) 
You should bring the thing you
are looking at nearer to the lens
and not the other way round.
turret – as it is turned the 
objectives click into place, ﬁrst 
the medium-power, then the 
high-power
objective lenses – ×4 (low);
×10 (medium); ×40 (high power)
stage – microscope
slide placed here
condenser – focuses light on 
to the object with an 
iris diaphragm – used to vary 
the intensity of light reaching 
the object
built-in light source
eyepiece lens
ﬁne focus – used to focus
the high-power objective
coarse focus – used to focus the
low- and medium-power objectives
using the compound microscope
 
■Figure A2.2.3 Light microscopy
In the simple microscope (hand lens), the instrument can be held very close to the eye and is today 
mostly used to observe external structure. Some of the earliest hand lenses detailed observations of 
living cells.
Top tip!
You should have 
experience of making 
temporary mounts 
of cells and tissues, 
staining, measuring 
sizes using an eyepiece 
graticule, focusing 
with coarse and 
fine adjustments, 
calculating actual size 
and magnification, 
producing a scale 
bar and taking 
photographs. Adaptors 
are available that 
allow cameras or 
smartphones to 
be attached to the 
eyepiece lens to enable 
photos to be taken. 
See more on this in 
the Tools section on 
page 56.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
53
Light (compound) microscopes have been instrumental in understanding cell structure and 
function, and revealing organisms that are not visible with the naked eye. The objective lens forms 
an image (in the microscope tube) that is then further magnified by the eyepiece lens, producing a 
greatly enlarged image. Initially, coarse focus enables you to locate and see the specimen under low 
power. Fine focus can be used to resolve the image under higher powers. 
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
The light microscope
1	 Select a low-power lens. Make sure the lens clicks 
into position.
2	 Examine the prepared slide without the microscope 
and note the position, colour and rough size 
of specimen.
3	 Place the slide on the stage, coverslip uppermost, 
viewing it from the side. Position it with stage 
adjustment controls so that the specimen is lit up.
4	 Focus using first the coarse and then the fine focusing 
controls. Use both hands to alter the focusing 
controls; this helps keep the controls working properly 
and to not go out of alignment.
	
Note: The image will be reversed and upside down 
when seen by viewing the slide directly. When focusing, 
always move the stage down, away from the objective 
lens, to avoid moving the slide on to the objective lens 
(which could damage the lens and break the slide).
5	 For higher magnifications, swing in the relevant 
objective lens carefully, checking there is space for 
it. Adjust the focus using the fine control only. If 
the object is in the centre of the field of view with 
the ×10 objective, it should remain in view with the 
×40 objective.
6	 When you have finished using the microscope: 
l	 turn the objective lens back to ×10 and then 
lower the stage
l	 remove the last slide and return it to the correct 
section in the tray
l	 clean the stage if necessary and check eyepiece 
lenses and objective lenses are clean
l	 unplug the cable and store tidily, replacing the 
dust cover.
Common mistake
When using a compound light microscope:
l	 Never force any of the controls.
l	 Never touch any of the glass surfaces with anything other than a clean, dry lens tissue.
l	 Do not hold the microscope with one hand. When moving the microscope, hold the stand 
above the stage with one hand and rest the base of the stand on your other hand.
l	 Do not tilt the microscope. Always keep the microscope vertical (or the eyepiece may fall out).
l	 Do not touch the surface of lenses with your fingers.
l	 Do not allow any solvent to touch a lens.
l	 When focusing, move the stage down, away from the objective lens, to avoid moving the slide 
on to the objective lens.
Biological material to be examined by compound microscopy must be sufficiently transparent for 
light rays to pass through. When bulky tissues and parts of organs are to be examined, thin sections 
are cut. Thin sections are largely colourless.
 
■Table A2.2.3 The skills of light microscopy
You need to master and be able to demonstrate these aspects of good practice
Knowledge of the parts of your microscope and care of the instrument – its light source, lenses and 
focusing mechanisms.
Use in low-power magnification first, using prepared slides and temporary mounts.
Switching to high-power magnification, maintaining focus and examining different parts of the image.
Types of microscope slides and the preparation of temporary mounts, both stained and unstained.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
54
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Preparation of a temporary mount
Cells can be mounted on slides so they can be viewed 
under a microscope. These can be disposed of once the 
cells have been seen and studied. Stains can be used to 
view cell features more clearly. Techniques describing 
how temporary mounts can be made are outlined here.
Living cells are not only very small but also transparent. 
In light microscopy it is common practice to add 
dyes or stains to introduce sufficient contrast and so 
differentiate structure. Dyes and stains that are taken 
up by cells are especially useful.
Observing the nucleus, cytoplasm and cell 
membrane in human cheek cells
Take a smear from the inside lining of your cheek using 
a fresh, unused cotton bud you remove from the pack. 
Touch the materials removed by the cotton bud on 
to the centre of a microscope slide and add a cover 
slip (see Figure A2.2.4). Dispose of the cotton bud 
safely and hygienically. Handle the microscope slide 
yourself and, at the end of the observation, immerse 
the slide in 1% sodium hypochlorite solution to sterilize 
the slide and cover slip. To observe the structure of 
human cheek cells, irrigate the slide with a drop of 
methylene blue stain (following the procedure shown 
in Figure A2.2.4) and examine some of the individual 
cells with medium- and high-power magnification.
mounted needle
cover slip
microscope slide
cheek cell smear
Making a temporary mount
pipette
Irrigating a temporary mount
stain drawn across,
under the cover slip
blotting paper
a drop of stain placed
beside the cover slip
 
■Figure A2.2.4 Preparing living cells for light microscopy
You could also observe chloroplasts in moss leaf 
cells, or the nucleus, cell wall and vacuole in an onion 
epidermis cell.
TOK
Living tissues prepared for examination under the microscope are typically cut into thin sections and 
stained. Both processes may alter the appearance of cells. Is our knowledge acquired with the aid of 
technology fundamentally different from that which we acquire from our unaided sense? If so, what 
may be done about this, in practical terms?
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
The eyepiece graticule
The size of a cell can be measured under the microscope. A transparent scale, called 
a graticule, is mounted in the eyepiece at the focal plane (there is a ledge for it to 
rest on). In this position, when the object under observation is in focus, so too is the 
scale. The size (for example, length or diameter) of the object may then be recorded in 
arbitrary units. Next, the graticule scale is calibrated using a stage micrometer – in 
effect, a tiny, transparent ruler, which is placed on the microscope stage in place of the 
slide and then observed. With the eyepiece and stage micrometer scales superimposed, 
the true dimensions of the object can be estimated in micrometres. Figure A2.2.5 
shows how this is done.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
55
red cell (side view) with
the eyepiece graticule
scale superimposed
the stage micrometer is placed on the
stage in place of the prepared slide and
examined at the same magnification
2 Calibrating the graticule scale
   by alignment of graticule and
   stage micrometer scales
the measurement of the blood
cell diameter is converted to a
µm measurement
10
8
6
3
1
0
9
7
4
2
5
0
10
9
8
7
6
4
3
1 2
5
1 Measuring a cell (e.g. a red blood cell)
   by alignment with the scale on the
   eyepiece graticule
using a prepared
slide of mammalian
blood smear
shelf –
the eyepiece
graticule is
installed here
coarse and
fine focus
controls
compound light
microscope
stage
built-in light
source
with iris
diaphragm
eyepiece
0
10
9
8
7
6
4
3
1 2
5
graticule much
enlarged – scale
is arbitrary units
1.5 (15 units)
now graticule scale and stage micrometer
scale are superimposed
in this case, the red cell
appears to have a
diameter of about 8 µm
10 µm
2
0
1
0
nosepiece with
medium- and high-
power objectives
red cell diameter
measured
(arbitrary units)
0
2
1
 
■Figure A2.2.5 Measuring the size of cells
Once the size of a cell has been measured, a scale bar line may be added to a micrograph or drawing 
to record the actual size of the structure, as illustrated in Figure A2.2.6.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
56
interpretive drawing
cell surface membrane
small food
vacuoles
pseudopodia
nucleus
large food vacuole
cytoplasm – outer,
clear (ectoplasm)
and inner, granular
(endoplasm)
contractile
vacuole
scale bar 0.1mm
 
■Figure A2.2.6 
Recording size by 
means of scale bars
	ATL A2.2A 
Converting smartphones into ‘CellCams’
Photographs of microscope images (photomicrographs) have 
traditionally been taken using expensive camera-mounted 
apparatus. However, smartphones can take high-quality 
images without the need for such specialized apparatus. It is 
difficult to take photographs using hand-held smartphones, 
because slight variations in the angle of the phone make 
the image invisible or partially obscured. Simple methods 
can be used to attach the smartphone to the eyepiece of 
the microscope, enabling images to be taken. Such adaptors 
enable you to create your own ‘CellCam’.
Take a toilet-paper cardboard tube (4.5 cm diameter and 4 cm 
in length) and add an adhesive foam weather-strip (1–2 cm 
wide) to the inside so that the cardboard tube fits securely 
around the eyepiece of the microscope. For a mid-mounted 
smartphone camera, attach the tube to the camera using 
ice-cream sticks secured either side of the tube using elastic 
bands (Figure A2.2.7a). For a corner-mounted camera, cut 
a slit in one edge of the tube and slot the camera inside 
(Figure A2.2.7b). Put the cardboard tube down over the 
eyepiece of the microscope. The CellCam can then be used 
to capture images or video of specimens.
Try making a CellCam using your smartphone and the 
methodology above and taking photos of specimens under 
the microscope. Remember to be careful when putting the 
cardboard tube over the eyepiece of the microscope.
 
■Figure A2.2.7 Converting a smartphone 
into a ‘CellCam’: a) mid-mounted 
camera b) corner-mounted camera
a Mid-mounted camera
b Corner-mounted camera
 
photomicrograph of Amoeba 
proteus (living specimen) – 
phase contrast microscopy


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
57
 
■Magnification of an image
Magnification is the number of times larger an image is than the specimen. The magnification 
obtained with a compound microscope depends on which of the lenses you use. For example, using 
a ×10 eyepiece and a ×10 objective lens (medium power), the image is magnified ×100 (10 × 10). 
When you switch to the ×40 objective (high power) with the same eyepiece lens, then the 
magnification becomes ×400 (10 × 40). These are the most usual orders of magnification you will 
use in your laboratory work.
There is actually no limit to magnification. For example, if a magnified image is photographed, then 
further enlargement can be made photographically. This is what may happen with photomicrographs 
shown in books and articles.
When an image from a light microscope is magnified photographically the detail will be no greater, 
see Figure A2.2.9, page 59.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Calculating scales of magnification
Make a temporary mount of a plant cell 
using the techniques outlined on page 54. 
Pondweed is a good plant to use as the 
leaves are thin and easily removed from 
the plant. Draw one plant cell using the 
method shown on page 56. Use an 
eyepiece graticule to estimate the size 
(either the length or width) of a plant cell 
using the technique in Figure A2.2.5. Now 
calculate the magnification of the image 
you have drawn.
Magnification is given by the formula:
magnification = size of image
size of specimen
So, for a particular plant cell of 
150 μm diameter, photographed with 
a microscope and then enlarged in 
a drawing or photographically, the 
magnification in a print showing the cell 
at 15 cm diameter (150 000 μm) is:
150 000
150
 = ×1000
If a further enlargement is made to 
show the same cell at 30 cm diameter 
(300 000 μm), then the magnification is
300 000
150
 = ×2000
3	 Using the scale 
bar given in Figure 
A2.2.6, calculate 
the maximum 
observed length of 
the Amoeba cell. 
4	 Calculate the 
magnification 
of the image of 
Escherichia coli in 
Figure A2.2.1 on 
page 50.
Scale bars
To add a scale bar to your drawing of a biological specimen:
1	 Use the stage micrometer and eyepiece graticule to work out the distance between two markings 
on the eyepiece graticule, i.e. the number of micrometres equivalent to one unit (or division) on 
the eyepiece graticule (Figure A2.2.5). 
2	 Remove the stage micrometer and place the specimen on the stage. 
3	 Measure the length of the specimen using the eyepiece graticule. The measurement will be in 
graticule units (which will depend on the magnification you are using). 
4	 Determine the length of the specimen in micrometres by multiplying the number of graticule 
units by the length represented by one unit. For example, if the length of the specimen is 
20 graticule units, and the length of each unit represents 10 µm, the total length of the specimen 
will be 20 × 10 = 200 µm. 
	
◆Magnification: how 
many more times larger 
an object appears.
2	 Calculate what 
magnification 
occurs with a ×6 
eyepiece and a 
×10 objective.
Top tip!
Scale bars can be 
used as a way of 
indicating the actual 
sizes in drawings 
and micrographs, 
and can be used to 
calculate magnification. 
Magnification is 
calculated by dividing 
the actual length of 
the scale bar by the 
length indicated on the 
scale bar.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
58
Ideally your scale bar needs to be around 20% of the length of the specimen. If the specimen is 
200 µm then the scale bar would be 20% of 200 = 40 µm. Now draw the specimen on a piece of 
paper or in your lab notebook and measure the length of your drawing. If the length of the drawing 
is 100 mm, then the scale bar needs to be drawn as 20% of this length = 20 mm. Draw a line next to 
your drawing 20 mm in length and mark on this the actual length it represents (40 µm).
The actual length represented by the scale bar should be a whole number, and so the measurement 
taken from the specimen may need to be rounded. For example, if the specimen is 52.5 µm, 20% 
of this number is 10.5 µm. This can be rounded down to give 10 µm – ratios can then be used to 
establish the length of the scale bar. 10/52.5 gives one ratio (the length of the scale bar to the actual 
length of the organism). If the length of the drawing is 96 mm, the second ratio is x/96 where x is the 
length of the scale bar. When the ratios are resolved: 
10/52.5 = x/96
x = (10 × 96)/52.5 = 18.3 mm
The scale bar is then drawn to the length 18.3 mm, and the actual length that this represents 
recorded as 10 µm.
Top tip!
The size of cells, or components of cells, can be 
calculated given the amount of magnification 
and a scale drawing of the object. Simple 
equations can be used to calculate the 
magnification or actual size of the specimen.
l	 I = size of image (drawing of an object 
on paper)
l	 A = actual size of the object being 
measured
l	 M = magnification (the size of an object 
compared to its actual size, i.e. the number 
of times larger an image is than the 
specimen)
So, M = I/A; A = I/M and I = A × M.
A memory diagram can be used, showing how 
to calculate the magnification, actual size or 
image size of an object (Figure A2.2.8).
mm
mm
I
A
M
 
■Figure A2.2.8 Memory diagram showing 
how to calculate the magnification, 
actual size or image size of an object
Remember the equation as AIM or IAM, and 
remember to convert units so that they are the 
same for both I and A.
5	 A highly magnified electron micrograph of the bacterium Escherichia coli was 
accompanied by a scale bar of length 23 mm and labelled 1 μm. The following features 
were measured. Complete the following table. Express their actual size in 
appropriate units.
Feature
Measurement on scale bar (mm)
Actual size
thickness of the wall
1
length of a flagellum
32
width of the cell
24
length of the cell
5
Top tip!
Remember to convert 
all values to the same 
unit of measurement: 
if you do not do this, 
your results will be 
incorrect by a factor 
of 100, 1000 or even 
1 000 000.
l	 Convert mm into 
μm by multiplying 
by 1000.
l	 Convert μm into 
mm by dividing 
by 1000.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
59
 
■Resolution of an image
The resolution (resolving power) of a microscope is its ability to separate visually small objects that 
are very close together. If two separate objects cannot be resolved, they are seen as one object. Merely 
enlarging them does not separate them. Resolution is a property of lenses that is quite different from 
their magnification – and is more important.
Resolution is determined by the wavelength of light. Light is composed of relatively long wavelengths, 
whereas shorter wavelengths give better resolution. For the light microscope, the limit of resolution is 
about 0.2 μm. As a result, two objects less than 0.2 μm apart may be seen as one object, which means 
that the image is blurred at low resolution. Figure A2.2.9 shows the importance of resolution over 
magnification. In this figure, an image of a chloroplast at the same magnification is shown at low 
(left-hand image) and high resolution (right-hand image). The high-resolution image has been taken 
using an electron microscope, and the low-resolution image with a light microscope. Details of the 
internal and external membrane structure cannot be seen under low resolution, however much the 
image is enlarged. This is because the membrane is too thin to be seen and resolved as separate 
structures using the light microscope.
a chloroplast enlarged (×6000) from a 
photomicrograph obtained by light microscopy
b chloroplast from a transmission 
electron micrograph
 
■Figure A2.2.9 Magnification a) without and b) with resolution; 
the micrograph in b) has been colourized
Nature of science: Measurements
Using instruments is a form of 
quantitative observation
Biology – like all natural sciences – is an observation-
based science, perhaps more so than chemistry or physics. 
Living organisms are very diverse and the first task of any 
biological investigation is the observation and recording of 
biological phenomena. 
Observations in biology are varied and may include counting, 
drawing, photographing, video recording (of animal 
behaviour) or measuring changes in concentration or pH 
during biochemical reactions. Quantitative observations 
are ones that involve numerical data, for example the 
recording values for a dependent variable. Qualitative 
observations reinforce quantitative data: they record 
observations relevant to the study.
Observations and measurements are the basis for the 
development of new biological hypotheses. In biology, the 
observations often arise from questions of the form, ‘How 
does variable X affect variable Y?’ Knowledge acquired by the 
senses is known as empirical data. 
Biologists often ‘enhance’ their senses by using technology 
with a variety of analytical instruments. This enables them to 
study phenomena that are beyond or outside the direct limits 
of our human senses. 
For example, the electron microscope has been used to study 
the ultrastructure of cells and the technique of NMR (nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy) has been used to study the 
folding and unfolding of proteins. In this technique, molecules 
are studied by recording the interaction of high-frequency 
radio waves with the nuclei of molecules placed in a strong 
magnetic field. The effect of ultrasound has been studied 
on organisms such as bats, dolphins and porpoises which 
use it for ‘echo location’. Humans are not able to directly 
perceive electromagnetic radiation or sound waves with these 
frequencies (energies).
	
◆Resolution: the 
amount of detail that can 
be seen.
6	 Distinguish 
between resolution 
and magnification.
	
◆Quantitative data: 
numerical measurements 
with units (and associated 
random uncertainty), 
which are often digitally 
recorded and processed.
	
◆Qualitative data: 
descriptive information 
used to record the 
conditions in which 
data are recorded, or to 
describe the features or 
properties of an object.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
60
Developments in microscopy
The technology used to view cells and their internal structure has developed through time, allowing 
greater detail to be discovered, which has revealed increasing knowledge of how cells function.
 
■Electron microscopy – the discovery of cell ultrastructure
Microscopes were invented simultaneously in different parts of the world at a time when information 
travelled slowly. Modern-day advances in microscopy and communications have allowed for 
improvements in the ability to investigate and collaborate, enriching scientific endeavour.
The electron microscope (EM) uses electrons to make a magnified image in much the same way as 
the optical microscope uses light. Electrons can show particle and wave properties, and need to 
travel through a vacuum. This means the biological material must be dead. However, because an 
electron beam has a much shorter wavelength, its resolving power is much greater. When the 
electron microscope is used with biological materials, the limit of resolution is about 5 nm. (The size 
of nanometres is given in Table A2.2.1, page 51.)
Only with the electron microscope can the detailed structures of cell organelles be observed. This is 
why the electron microscope is used to resolve the fine detail of the contents of cells, the organelles 
and cell membranes, collectively known as cell ultrastructure. It is difficult to exaggerate the 
importance of electron microscopy in providing our detailed knowledge of cells.
In the electron microscope, the electron beam is generated by an electron gun, and focusing is 
by electromagnets, rather than by glass lenses. We cannot see electrons, so the electron beam 
is focused on to a fluorescent screen for viewing, or on to a photographic plate for permanent 
recording (Figure A2.2.10).
In transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the electron beam is passed through an extremely 
thin section of fixed, biological material. Membranes and other structures are stained with heavy 
metal ions, making them electron-opaque so they stand out as dark areas in the image.
In scanning electron microscopy (SEM), a narrow electron beam is scanned back and forth across 
the surface of the specimen. Electrons that are reflected or emitted from this surface are detected and 
converted into a three-dimensional image (Figure A2.2.11).
	
◆Electron microscope 
(EM): microscope in 
which a beam of electrons 
replaces light so the 
powers of magnification 
and resolution are 
correspondingly 
much greater.
	
◆Ultrastructure: 
fine structure of 
cells, determined by 
electron microscopy.
Electron microscopes have a greater
resolving power than light microscopes.
Their application to biology has established
the presence and structure of all the cell
organelles.
 
■Figure A2.2.10 Using the 
transmission electron microscope
 
■Figure A2.2.11 A scanning electron micrograph of red blood cells (5.7 μm in diameter); 
the image from an electron microscope is in black and white – this image has been coloured


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
61
7	 List the features of cells that can be observed by electron microscopy that are not visible 
by light microscopy.
8	 State two problems that arise in electron microscopy because of the nature of an 
electron in relation to the living cell.
The impact of electron microscopy on cell biology: the presence and 
structure of organelles
The nucleus is the largest substructure (organelle) of a cell and may be observed with a light 
microscope. However, most organelles cannot be viewed by light microscopy and none are large 
enough for internal details to be seen. It is by means of the electron microscope that we have learnt 
about the fine details of cell structure. Because electron microscopes have much greater resolving 
power than light microscopes, they can reveal structures that are not visible by light microscopy, 
such as organelles made from membranes.
	ATL A2.2B 
What do you think are the strengths and limitations of light microscopy compared to electron 
microscopy? Discuss in a group and draw up a comparison table.  
 
■Cryogenic electron microscopy
A more recent development in electron microscopy is a technique that involves flash-freezing solutions 
of proteins or other biomolecules and then exposing them to electrons to produce very high-resolution 
images of individual molecules. This technique is called cryogenic electron microscopy, because 
of the cryogenic temperatures used (Figure A2.2.12). The images are used to reconstruct the three-
dimensional shape of the molecule, which in turn reveals its function. Cryogenic electron microscopy is 
used to reveal how proteins work, how they malfunction in disease and how to target them with drugs. 
The most recent cryogenic electron microscopes are able to locate individual atoms within a protein. In 
2017, the Nobel Prize in chemistry was awarded to three scientists (Jacques Dubochet, Joachim Frank 
and Richard Henderson) for developing cryogenic electron microscopy.
Traditional electron microscopes place the specimen in a chamber that is kept under vacuum. 
This allows a pure beam of electrons to interact with the sample, without interference from particles 
that would be present in air. However, some materials, such as 
biological molecules, are not compatible with the high-vacuum 
conditions and intense electron beams used in traditional 
TEMs. Under the conditions of a vacuum, the water that 
surrounds the molecules evaporates, and the high-energy 
electrons destroy the molecules. Because cryogenic electron 
microscopes use frozen samples, less-intense electron beams 
can be used and the evaporation of water is no longer a problem. 
Prior to cryogenic electron microscopy, scientists relied on a 
technique called X-ray crystallography to view biomolecules, 
which involves crystallizing molecules, exposing them to 
X-rays and then reconstructing their shape from the patterns 
of diffracted X-rays. This technique was used to reveal the 
structure of DNA (see page 20). 
TOK
The investigation 
of cell structures by 
observation of electron 
micrographs of very 
thin sections of tissue 
(after dehydration and 
staining) raises the 
issue of whether the 
structures observed are 
actually present (or are 
artefacts). The solution 
to this problem, 
described above, is 
an example of how 
scientific knowledge 
may require multiple 
observations assisted 
by technology.
 
■Figure A2.2.12 Cryogenic electron microscope


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
62
 
■Freeze fracture
In an alternative method of preparation, biological material is instantly frozen solid in liquid 
nitrogen. At atmospheric pressure this liquid is at −196 ºC. At this temperature living materials do 
not change shape as the water present in them solidifies instantly.
This solidified tissue is then broken up in a vacuum, and the exposed surfaces are allowed to lose 
some of their ice; the surface is described as ‘etched’.
Finally, a carbon replica (a form of ‘mask’) of this exposed surface is made and coated with heavy 
metal, such as gold, to strengthen it. The mask of the surface is then examined in the electron 
microscope. The resulting electron micrograph is described as being produced by freeze etching.
A comparison of a cell nucleus observed by both transmission electron microscopy and by freeze 
etching is shown in Figure A2.2.13. 
Look at these images carefully. 
The picture we get of nucleus structure is consistent; therefore, we can be confident that our views of 
cell structure obtained by electron microscopy are realistic.
 
■Figure A2.2.13 Electron micrographs from thin-sectioned and freeze-etched material showing the nucleus of a liver cell
observed as thin section
replica of freeze-etched surface
nuclear membrane
(a double membrane)
nuclear membrane
(with pores)
cytoplasm with
mitochondria
	
◆Freeze etching: 
preparation of specimens 
for electron microscope 
examination by freezing, 
fracturing along natural 
structural lines and 
preparing a replica.
 
■Fluorescence microscopy
Fluorescent dyes absorb light at one wavelength and emit it at 
another longer wavelength. Some such dyes bind specifically 
to target molecules in cells, e.g., DNA, and can reveal 
their cellular location when examined with a fluorescence 
microscope. 
A fluorescence microscope is used to detect cells stained with 
fluorescent dyes. This is similar to an ordinary light microscope 
except that the illuminating light is passed through two sets of 
filters. The first set filters the light before it reaches the 
specimen, passing only those wavelengths that excite the 
specifically chosen fluorescent dye. The second filter blocks out 
this light and passes only those wavelengths emitted when the 
dye fluoresces. Dyed objects show up in bright colour on a dark 
background (Figure A2.2.14). 
 
■Figure A2.2.14 Fluorescent imaging: 
immunofluorescence of cancer cells with nuclei in blue, 
cytoplasm in red and damaged DNA in green


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
63
Other dyes can be coupled to antibody molecules, which then act as highly specific and versatile 
staining reagents that bind selectively to targeted biomolecules (for example, proteins or DNA), 
showing their distribution in the cell. Such techniques were used to explain the structure of cell 
plasma membranes, and the mechanism by which muscles contract. 
Immunofluorescence uses antibodies chemically labelled with fluorescent dyes to visualize 
molecules under a light microscope. The antibodies attach to affected cells and the dyes indicate 
which cells have been marked in this way. Fluorescence microscopy has allowed doctors to make a 
diagnosis on whether cancer is present based on small samples of tissue (Figure A2.2.14).
Structures common to cells 
in all living organisms
 
■The features of cells
A cell consists of a nucleus surrounded by cytoplasm, composed mainly of water, contained within 
the cell membrane made of lipids. The nucleus is the structure that controls and directs the activities 
of the cell. It contains DNA, which is the hereditary material of all living organisms (see page 44). 
The cytoplasm provides the medium in which many of the metabolic reactions of the cell occur, with 
water being the essential molecule needed for enzymes to function at their optimum (see page 210). 
It is the site of the enzyme-controlled chemical reactions of life, which we call ‘metabolism’. The 
cell membrane, known as the plasma membrane, is the barrier controlling entry to and exit from 
the cytoplasm.
Newly formed cells grow and enlarge. A growing cell can normally divide into two cells. Cell division 
is very often restricted to unspecialized cells before they become modified for a particular task – a 
process known as differentiation.
Concept: Diversity
Because of specialization, cells show great variety in shape, structure and function. 
This variety in structure reflects the evolutionary adaptations of cells to different 
environments and to different specialized functions – for example, within 
multicellular organisms.
 
■Animal and plant cells
No ‘typical’ cell exists – there is a very great deal of variety among cells. However, we shall see that 
most cells have features in common. Viewed using a compound microscope, the appearance of a 
plant cell and animal cell are shown in Figure A2.2.15. Both are bound by a membrane and contain a 
nucleus. The plant cell has additional organelles that are visible (chloroplasts and a permanent vacuole).
	
◆Immunofluorescence: 
a technique for 
determining the location 
of target cells by reaction 
with an antibody labelled 
with a fluorescent dye.
	
◆Nucleus: largest 
organelle of eukaryotic 
cells; controls and directs 
the activity of the cell.
	
◆Cytoplasm: fluid 
that fills each cell and is 
enclosed by the plasma 
membrane.
	
◆Plasma membrane: 
the membrane of lipid 
and protein that forms 
the surface of cells; 
constructed as a fluid 
mosaic membrane.
	
◆Differentiation: 
process by which cells 
become specialized, when 
some genes and not 
others are expressed in a 
cell’s genome.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
64
junction between walls
(the middle lamella)
large permanent vacuole,
surrounded by a membrane
cellulose cell wall
pit, where the cytoplasm
of cells connects
chloroplasts
(with starch grains)
cytoplasm
plasma
membrane
nucleus
secretory
granules
temporary
vacuoles
centrosome
 
■Figure A2.2.15 Animal and plant cells with interpretive drawings to indicate the structure and function of organelles
Canadian pondweed (Elodea)
grows submerged in fresh water
5cm
human
1m
photomicrograph of a human cheek cell
(×800)
photomicrograph of a leaf cell of Elodea
(×400)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
65
Animal and plant cells have at least three structures in common. These are their cytoplasm with its 
nucleus, surrounded by a plasma membrane. In addition, there are many tiny structures in the 
cytoplasm, called organelles, most of them common to both animal and plant cells. An organelle is 
a discrete structure within a cell, having a specific function. Some organelles are too small or thin to 
be seen at this magnification. We will learn about the structure of organelles using the electron 
microscope (page 60).
There are some important basic differences between plant and animal cells, which will be explored 
later (see page 68 in this section). 
Cells of plants, animals, fungi and protoctista have cells with a large, obvious nucleus (although 
there are exceptions to this – see page 78). The surrounding cytoplasm contains many different 
membranous organelles. These types of cells are called eukaryotic cells (meaning a ‘true nucleus’).
On the other hand, bacteria contain no true nucleus and their cytoplasm does not have the 
organelles of eukaryotes. These are called prokaryotic cells (meaning ‘before the nucleus’).
This distinction between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells is a fundamental division and is more 
significant than the differences between plants and animals. We will first examine the detailed 
structure of the prokaryotic cell.
Concept: Unity
Although there are a large variety of different cell types, all cells can be divided into 
two distinctive groups: eukaryotes (cell that have a nucleus) and prokaryotes (cells 
that do not have a nucleus). Each cell type has distinctive features within the group; 
there are also similarities that all cells share (e.g. DNA, a plasma membrane, cytoplasm 
and ribosomes).
Prokaryote cell structure
We have seen that the use of the electron microscope in biology led to the discovery of eukaryotic 
and prokaryotic cell structure (page 60). Bacteria and cyanobacteria (a group of bacteria that can 
photosynthesize) are prokaryotes.
The generalized structure of a bacterium is shown in Figure A2.2.16. The prokaryote cell structure 
varies (as shown in the figure), but the distinctive features of the prokaryotes are:
l	 they are exceedingly small – about the size of individual organelles found in the cells 
of eukaryotes
l	 they contain no true nucleus but have a single loop of DNA in the cytoplasm, referred to as 
a nucleoid
l	 their cytoplasm does not have the membrane-bound organelles of eukaryotes.
Top tip!
There are two broad groups, or domains, of prokaryotes – eubacteria and archaea. In this section, 
and when the term ‘bacteria’ is used, the group being referred to is the eubacteria. 
	
◆Organelle: a unit of 
cell substructure.
	
◆Eukaryote: group 
of organisms that have 
a nuclear membrane 
surrounding their genetic 
material, i.e., they have a 
true nucleus.
	
◆Prokaryote: 
unicellular organism 
without a true nucleus; 
they have a loop of 
naked DNA .
Link
In HL Biology, you 
need to know the 
differences between 
the two domains of 
bacteria. See Chapter 
A3.2, page 137.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
66
cell wall
cytoplasm
cell membrane
food store
small (70S) ribosomes
chromosome
always found
capsule (polysaccharide
coat) as additional
protection
plasmid
infolded cell membrane,
e.g. associated with
photosynthetic pigments,
or particular enzymes
flagellum
(simple structure)
pili
sometimes present
In Figure A2.2.17, the ultrastructure of Escherichia coli is shown. E. coli is a common bacterium 
that occurs in huge numbers in the lower intestine of humans and other endothermic (once 
known as ‘warm-blooded’) vertebrates, such as mammals. It is a major component of the faeces of 
these animals.
This tiny organism was named by a bacteriologist, Professor T. Escherich, in 1885. Notice the 
scale bar in Figure A2.2.17. This bacterium is typically about 1–3 μm in length – about the size of a 
mitochondrion in a eukaryotic cell.
All bacteria contain the following cell components:
l	 a cell wall (made from peptidoglycan – a polymer made of polysaccharide and peptide chains)
l	 plasma membrane
l	 cytoplasm
l	 naked DNA (i.e. not associated with histone proteins – see page 26) in a loop
l	 70S ribosomes.
 
■Figure A2.2.16 Generalized structure of a bacterium
9	 Calculate the 
approximate 
magnification of 
the image of E. coli 
in Figure A2.2.17.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
67
*structures that occur
  in all bacteria
flagella – bring about
movement of the
bacterium
plasma membrane*–
a barrier across which
all nutrients and waste
products must pass
ribosomes*– site of
protein synthesis
nucleoid*– genetic
material: a single
loop of naked DNA
of about 4000 genes
mesosome
cell wall*– protects
cell from rupture
caused by osmosis and
possible harm from
other organisms
plasmid
food granule
scale bar
cytoplasm*–
site of the chemical
reactions of life
pili – enable
attachment to surface
of other bacteria which
allows conjugation to
take place
1mm
electron micrograph of Escherichia coli
 
■Figure A2.2.17 The structure of Escherichia coli, together with an interpretive drawing
Ribosomes are organelles where protein synthesis takes place. There are two different sizes of 
ribosomes found in cells – smaller 70S ribosomes are found in bacteria and larger 80S ribosomes are 
found in eukaryotic cells (see page 69).
Unlike eukaryotic chromosomes, which are linear (page 110) with many contained in each cell, 
prokaryotic chromosomes are singular and form a loop within the nucleoid region of the cell 
(Figures A2.2.16 and A2.2.17).
	ATL A2.2C 
Species of bacteria can be divided into two broad groups – gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria. Find out the differences between these two groups. How are these differences 
determined, and why is it important for scientists to know the differences?
Gram-positive eubacteria include Bacillus and Staphylococcus. Find out the structure of these two 
species. How do they differ from the bacterium shown in Figure A2.2.17?
Eukaryote cell structure
The chemicals in the cytoplasm are substances formed and used in the chemical reactions of life. 
All the reactions of life are known collectively as metabolism, and the chemicals are known 
as metabolites.
Cytoplasm and organelles are contained within the plasma membrane. This membrane is clearly a 
barrier of sorts. It must be crossed by all the metabolites that move between the cytoplasm and the 
environment of the cell. We will return to the structure of the cell membrane and how molecules 
enter and leave cells in Theme B2. 
	
◆Metabolism: 
integrated network of all 
the biochemical reactions 
of life.
	
◆Metabolite: a 
chemical substance 
involved in metabolism.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
68
animal cell
plant cell
Golgi apparatus
free ribosomes
chloroplast
lysosome
rough endoplasmic
reticulum (RER)
with ribosomes
attached
mitochondrion
smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum (SER)
cell surface
membrane
cellulose
cell wall
free ribosomes
lysosome
rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
(RER) with
ribosomes
attached
mitochondrion
centrioles
smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
(SER)
cell surface
membrane
permanent vacuole
nucleolus
chromatin
nuclear envelope
temporary vacuoles
formed by intucking
of plasma membrane
nucleus
 
■Figure A2.2.18 The ultrastructure of the eukaryotic animal and plant cell
We next consider the structure and function of the organelles. 
Our knowledge of organelles has been built up by examining electron micrographs of many different 
cells. The outcome, a detailed picture of the ultrastructure of animal and plant cells, is represented 
diagrammatically in a generalized cell in Figure A2.2.18.
 
■Introducing the organelles present in all eukaryotic cells
Nucleus
The appearance of the nucleus in electron micrographs is shown in Figure A2.2.13 (page 62). 
The nucleus is the largest organelle in the eukaryotic cell, typically 10–20 μm in diameter. It is 
surrounded by a double-layered membrane, the nuclear envelope. This contains many nuclear 
pores formed by specific proteins. These pores are tiny, about 100 nm in diameter. However, the 
pores are so numerous that they make up about one-third of the nuclear membrane’s surface area. 
This suggests that communications between nucleus and cytoplasm are important.
The nucleus contains the chromosomes. These thread-like structures are visible at the time the 
nucleus divides (page 651). Chromosomes are made of DNA bound to histone proteins (page 26). 
Histones help to pack the DNA into condensed structures so that they can be moved within the cell 
during division. At other times, the chromosomes appear as a diffuse network called chromatin. 
	
◆Nuclear envelope: a 
lipid bilayer surrounding 
the genetic material 
of the cell, containing 
nuclear pores that 
control the movement of 
molecules between the 
inside of the nucleus and 
the cytoplasm.
	
◆Nuclear pore: a 
protein-lined channel in the 
nuclear envelope; regulates 
the transport of molecules 
between the nucleus and 
the cytoplasm.
	
◆Chromosome: length 
of DNA that carries 
specific genes in a linear 
sequence.
	
◆Chromatin: nuclear 
material comprised 
of DNA and histone 
proteins in the nucleus 
of eukaryotic cells at 
interphase; forms into 
chromosomes during 
mitosis and meiosis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
69
Common mistake
A common misconception is to regard a chromosome solely as a condensed structure, visible 
with a light microscope, implying that chromosomes are not present unless a cell is carrying out 
nuclear division. Chromosomes are continuously present in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell; the 
uncondensed state should be seen as normal as this form persists longest and is when the genes 
can be transcribed into proteins.
A nucleolus (plural, nucleoli) is a tiny, rounded, darkly-staining body. One or more nucleoli are 
present in the nucleus. It is the site where the sub-units of ribosomes (see below) are synthesized. 
Chromatin, chromosomes and the nucleolus are visible only if stained with certain dyes. The 
everyday role of the nucleus in cell management, and its behaviour when the cell divides, are the 
subject of Chapter D2.1 (page 648). 
Most cells contain one nucleus but there are interesting exceptions. For example, both the red blood 
cells of mammals (page 78) and the sieve tube element of the phloem of flowering plants (page 79) 
do not have a nucleus. Both lose their nucleus as they mature.
Mitochondria
Mitochondria appear mostly as rod-shaped or cylindrical organelles in electron micrographs (Figure 
A2.2.19). Occasionally their shape is more variable. They are relatively large organelles, typically 
0.5–1.5 μm wide and 3.0–10.0 μm long. Mitochondria are found in all cells and are usually present 
in very large numbers. Very metabolically active cells contain thousands of them in their cytoplasm, 
for example, muscle fibres and hormone-secreting cells. Human liver cells can individually have 
2000 mitochondria.
The mitochondrion also has a double membrane. The outer membrane is a smooth boundary, while 
the inner membrane is folded to form cristae. The interior of the mitochondrion contains an aqueous 
solution of metabolites and enzymes. This is called the matrix. The mitochondrion is the site of the 
aerobic stages of respiration (see Chapter C1.2, page 416).
TEM of a thin section of a mitochondrion
inner membrane
outer membrane
matrix
cristae
a mitochondrion, cut open
to show the inner membrane and cristae
In the mitochondrion many of the enzymes of
respiration are housed, and the ‘energy currency’
molecules adenosine triphosphate (ATP) are formed.
 
■Figure A2.2.19 The mitochondrion 
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are tiny structures, approximately 25 nm in diameter. They are built of two subunits 
and do not have membranes as part of their structures. Chemically, they consist of protein and 
the nucleic acid RNA. Ribosomes are found free in the cytoplasm and bound to endoplasmic 
reticulum (rough endoplasmic reticulum – RER, see below). They also occur within mitochondria 
and in chloroplasts. The sizes of tiny objects like ribosomes are recorded in Svedberg units (S). 
This is a measure of their rate of sedimentation in centrifugation, rather than of their actual size. 
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse the 
terms ‘nucleus’ and 
‘nucleolus’. The 
nucleolus is a sub-
organelle located 
inside the nucleus, 
whereas the nucleus 
is a membrane-bound 
organelle in the cell. 
The nucleolus produces 
ribosomes, and the 
nucleus contains the 
genetic material of 
the cell.
	
◆Nucleolus: compact 
region of nucleus 
where ribosomes are 
synthesized.
	
◆Mitochondrion 
(plural, mitochondria): 
organelle in eukaryotic 
cells, site of Krebs 
cycle and the electron-
transport pathway.
	
◆Cristae: folds in the 
inner membrane of 
mitochondria.
	
◆Matrix: the fluid 
that is surrounded by 
the inner membrane 
of a mitochondrion, 
containing enzymes, 
ribosomes and 
mitochondrial DNA.
small subunit
large subunit
 
■Figure A2.2.20 
The ribosome


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
70
Ribosomes of mitochondria and chloroplasts are slightly smaller (70S) than those in the rest of the 
cell (80S). As we have already seen, prokaryotes contain 70S ribosomes (page 66).
Ribosomes are the sites where proteins are made in cells. The structure of a ribosome is shown in 
Figure A2.2.20. Many different types of cell contain vast numbers of ribosomes. Some of the cell 
proteins produced in the ribosomes have structural roles. Collagen is an example (Chapter B1.2, 
page 219). Most cell proteins are enzymes. These are biological catalysts: they cause the reactions of 
metabolism to occur more quickly under the conditions found within the cytoplasm.
Endoplasmic reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum consists of a network of folded membranes formed into sheets, tubes or 
sacs that are extensively interconnected. Endoplasmic reticulum is contiguous with (connected to) 
the membrane of the nuclear envelope (Figure A2.2.21). The cytoplasm of metabolically active cells 
is commonly packed with endoplasmic reticulum. In Figure A2.2.21 we can see there are two 
distinct types of endoplasmic reticulum.
smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
roles of endoplasmic reticulum
site of storage of calcium ions
in (relaxed) voluntary muscle
vesicles with enzymes
to deactivate toxins
vesicles with
steroid hormones
vesicles pinched off
with proteins/enzymes
for export from cell
ribosomes
nucleus
rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
electron micrograph of RER
electron micrograph of SER
SER and RER in cytoplasm, showing origin from outer membrane of nucleus
 
■Figure A2.2.21 Endoplasmic reticulum, rough (RER) and smooth (SER)
l	 Rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) has ribosomes attached. At its margin, vesicles are 
formed from swellings. A vesicle is a small, spherical organelle bounded by a single membrane, 
which becomes pinched off as it separates. These tiny sacs are then used to store and transport 
substances around the cell. For example, the RER is the site of synthesis of proteins that are 
‘packaged’ in the vesicles and then typically discharged from the cell by a process called 
exocytosis. Digestive enzymes are discharged in this way.
l	 Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) has no ribosomes. SER is the site of synthesis of 
substances needed by cells. For example, the SER is important in the manufacture of lipids. 
In the cytoplasm of voluntary muscle fibres, a special form of SER is the site of storage of calcium 
ions, which have an important role in the contraction of muscle fibres.
10	Explain why the 
nucleus in a human 
cheek cell (Figure 
A2.2.15, page 64) 
may be viewed by 
light microscopy in 
an appropriately 
stained cell, but 
the ribosomes 
cannot.
	
◆Endoplasmic 
reticulum: system of 
branching membranes 
in the cytoplasm of 
eukaryotic cells, existing 
as rough ER (with 
ribosomes) or as smooth 
ER (without ribosomes).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
71
Golgi apparatus
The Golgi apparatus consists of a stack-like collection of flattened membranous sacs (Figure A2.2.22). 
One side of the stack of membranes is formed by the fusion of membranes of vesicles from the SER 
and RER. At the opposite side of the stack, vesicles are formed from swellings at the margins that, 
again, become pinched off.
The Golgi apparatus occurs in all cells, but it is especially prominent in metabolically active cells – 
for example, secretory cells. It is the site of synthesis of specific biochemicals, such as hormones and 
enzymes. These are then packaged into vesicles. 
electron micrograph of Golgi apparatus, in section
vesicles pinched 
off here
stack of ﬂattened, 
membranous sacs
 
■Figure A2.2.22 The Golgi apparatus
Lysosomes
The Golgi apparatus produces a variety of different vesicles. In animal cells these vesicles may form 
lysosomes. Some vesicles develop into non-permanent vacuoles, which are small, temporary 
vacuoles that help sequester waste products.
Lysosomes are tiny spherical vesicles bound by a single membrane (Figure A2.2.23). They contain 
a concentrated mixture of digestive enzymes. These are correctly known as hydrolytic enzymes. 
They are produced in the Golgi apparatus or by the RER.
Lysosomes are involved in the breakdown of the contents of ‘food’ vacuoles. For example, harmful 
bacteria that invade the body are taken up into tiny vacuoles (they are engulfed) by special white 
blood cells called macrophages. Macrophages are part of the body’s defence system (Chapter C3.2, 
page 526).
Any foreign matter or food particles taken up into these vacuoles are then broken down. This occurs 
when lysosomes fuse with the vacuole. The products of digestion then escape into the liquid of the 
cytoplasm. Lysosomes will also destroy damaged organelles in this way.
When an organism dies, it is the hydrolytic enzymes in the lysosomes of the cells that escape 
into the cytoplasm and cause self-digestion, known as autolysis. Lysosomes are also involved in a 
process called apoptosis, or ‘programmed cell death’, which occurs in cells damaged by infection 
or mutation.
	
◆Golgi apparatus: 
a stack of flattened 
membranes in the 
cytoplasm involved in the 
processing, modifying and 
packaging of molecules.
	
◆Lysosomes: 
membrane-bound 
vesicles, common in the 
cytoplasm, containing 
digestive enzymes.
	
◆Non-permanent 
vacuoles: small vacuoles 
in animal cells used 
to temporarily store 
materials or to transport 
substances.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
72
side view
top view
soluble tubulin
growing point
 
■Figure A2.2.24 Structure of microtubules
vesicles from RER fuse 
to form ﬂattened
membranous sacs of 
the Golgi apparatus
steps in the
formation of
a lysosome
vesicles of hydrolytic
enzymes (lysosomes)
cut off from Golgi
apparatus
digestion occurs; 
useful products of 
digestion absorbed 
into cytoso of cell
undigested remains
discharged from cell
lysosome fuses
(bringing hydrolytic
enzymes into vacuole)
food vacuole
formed at cell
membrane (phagocytosis)
defunct
organelle
lysosomes budding off Golgi
 
■Figure A2.2.23 Lysosomes
Plasma membrane – the cell surface membrane
The plasma membrane is an extremely thin structure – 7 nm thick. It consists of a lipid bilayer 
in which proteins are embedded. This membrane has a number of roles. Firstly, it retains the 
cytoplasm. The cell surface membrane also forms the barrier across which all substances entering 
and leaving the cell must pass. In addition, it is where the cell is identified by surrounding cells.
The detailed structure and function of the cell surface membrane is the subject of Chapter B2.1 
(page 223).
Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is a network of fibres extending throughout the cytoplasm. It organises the 
structures and activities within the cell. There are three main types of fibre in the cytoskeleton: 
microtubules, microfilaments and intermediate filaments.
Microtubules are the thickest class of the cytoskeletal fibres and are straight, unbranched, hollow 
cylindrical fibres (Figure A2.2.24) about 25 nm in diameter. The cells of all eukaryotes, whether 
plants or animals, have a well-organized system of these microtubules that shape and support the 
cytoplasm. The network of microtubules is made of a helically arranged globular protein called 
tubulin. This is built up and broken down in the cell as the microtubule framework is required in 
different places for different tasks. 
What are the functions of microtubules? 
The movement of chromosomes during cell division is achieved by the 
lengthening and shortening of microtubules. Microtubules are involved in 
movement of other cell components within the cytoplasm too, acting to 
guide and direct them. 
The movement of organelles is facilitated by motor proteins (Figure A2.2.25) 
carrying organelles along the microtubules to their destination. For 
example, microtubules guide secretory vesicles from the Golgi apparatus to 
the plasma membrane. 
It provides mechanical support and maintains the shape of the cell. It is 
also dynamic and can be quickly dismantled and reassembled at another 
part of the cell, changing the shape of the cell. 
11	Outline the roles 
of lysosomes, 
the Golgi 
apparatus and 
the endoplasmic 
reticulum in the 
eukaryotic cell.
12	Outline how 
the electron 
microscope has 
increased our 
knowledge of cell 
structure.
	
◆Cytoskeleton: a 
microscopic network of 
protein filaments and 
tubules in the cytoplasm 
that give cells shape and 
are used for internal 
organization.
	
◆Microtubule: tiny, 
hollow protein tube 
in cytoplasm (e.g. a 
component of the spindle).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
73
    
Microfilaments (Figure A2.2.26) are the thinnest class of the cytoskeletal fibres, about 7 nm in 
diameter, and made up of solid rods of globular protein called actin. Each filament consists of a 
twisted double chain of actin molecules. Microfilaments are designed to resist tension.
monomer
subunits
actin microfilaments
    
The functions of microfilaments are: 
l	 They are involved in cleavage furrow formation to divide the cell during cell division. 
l	 They play a part in cell motility, particularly in muscle contraction.
l	 They maintain and change cell shape. 
13	Distinguish between the structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
14	Construct a table to distinguish between the chromosomes of prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic cells.
Processes of life in unicellular organisms
Unicellular and multicellular organisms share the same functions of life. The functions of life are:
◆	 homeostasis: maintaining a constant, stable internal environment 
◆	 metabolism: the complex network of interdependent and interacting chemical reactions 
occurring in living organisms
◆	 nutrition: process by which organisms take in and/or make use of food//nutrients
◆	 movement: moving from one place to another
◆	 excretion: elimination of waste created by metabolic processes inside cells
◆	 growth: increase in size, mass or number of cells within an organism
◆	 response to stimuli (sensitivity): reaction to changes in the environment
◆	 reproduction: formation of new individuals by sexual or asexual means.
vesicle
receptor for 
motor protein
motor protein  
(powered by ATP hydrolysis)
microtubule of 
cytoskeleton
 
■Figure A2.2.25 
Computer illustration 
of a microtubule with 
motor proteins
	
◆Microfilament: the 
thinnest class of the 
cytoskeletal fibres, made 
of solid rods of globular 
protein called actin.
 
■Figure A2.2.26 
Structure and assembly 
of microfilaments
Top tip!
In plant cells, the flow 
of cytoplasm over actin 
filaments is important 
for the distribution of 
chemical substances 
within the cell. This 
cytoplasmic streaming 
is due to actin–myosin 
interactions. 
Concept: Unity
All organisms, 
whether unicellular 
and multicellular, 
share the same life 
processes. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
74
The functions of life can be demonstrated in unicellular organisms as shown in Table A2.2.4.
 
■Table A2.2.4 Life processes in unicellular organisms 
Paramecium – a large protozoan (about 600 µm), common in 
freshwater ponds
Chlorella – a small alga (about 20 µm), abundant in freshwater 
ponds where its presence colours the water green
gullet (‘cytopharynx’)
food vacuoles of
bacteria formed here
waste
disposed of
products
of digestion
absorbed
into
cytoplasm
food vacuoles have
digestive enzymes
added, first in an acidic
phase, then in an
alkaline phase
direction of
movement
a feeding current
is generated
by cilia in the
oral groove
contractile vacuole
 
■Figure A2.2.27a Paramecium
nucleus
chloroplast
cytoplasm
plasma membrane
cellulose
cell wall
contractile vacuole
vacuoles
 
■Figure A2.2.27b Chlorella
Contractile vacuoles are used to expel water from the cell 
that has entered by osmosis. This maintains water levels 
within closely controlled limits.
Homeostasis
Water enters the cell by osmosis and is collected 
in contractile vacuoles. These vacuoles expel the 
water through the plasma membrane so that 
internal water levels are kept within acceptable 
limits.
Obtains the biochemicals it requires for metabolism by 
digestion of food particles. Energy transferred by respiration 
makes this possible. Respires aerobically, transferring energy 
to maintain cell functions.
Metabolism (including 
respiration)
Manufactures all biochemicals it requires for 
metabolism using sugars from photosynthesis 
and ions (such as nitrates) from the surrounding 
water. Energy transferred by respiration makes 
this possible.
Respires aerobically, transferring energy to 
maintain cell functions.
A ‘particle feeder’, it takes in small floating unicellular 
organisms into food vacuoles in the cytoplasm where the 
contents are digested and the products absorbed.
Nutrition
Synthesises sugars by photosynthesis in the light, 
using carbon dioxide and water (in a way that is 
almost identical to photosynthesis in flowering 
plants).
Loss of waste products (mainly CO2 and NH3) over the entire 
cell surface.
Excretion
Loss of waste products (mainly CO2) over the 
entire cell surface.
Commonly, reproduction occurs by nuclear division followed 
by a transverse constriction of the cytoplasm.
Reproduction
Periodically the cell contents divide into four 
autospores that each form a cell wall around 
themselves. Eventually these are released by 
breakdown of the mother-cell wall.
Moves rapidly through the water, rotating as it goes. 
Food vacuoles within can be seen being carried around 
the cytoplasm.
Movement
A stationary cell.
Cytoplasm streaming allows redistribution of 
biological molecules within the cell.
Typically detects favourable food particles in the water and 
moves towards them.
Sensitivity 
Typically responds to the absence of light by 
nuclear division followed by cell division.
Small cells grow to full size prior to cell division (dividing into 
two cells).
Growth/development
Small cells grow to full size prior to cell division 
into autospores.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
75
	ATL A2.2D 
1	 Put a drop of pond water on to a slide. Look at micro-organisms (microscopic living unicellular 
organisms) under a microscope.
2	 Find Euglena. If it is moving too fast, use a slide with a dimple in it (a dip in the middle) – this will 
restrict its movement to one part of the slide.
3	 If you don’t have access to pond water containing Euglena, access the following website:  
https://sketchfab.com/3d-models/euglena-17b2a7d702834a759c42f4927109d74a or use the 
search terms: pond life, microscope.
4	 What organelles (structures in the cell) can you see? Do the features belong to the animal 
kingdom? Do the features belong to the plant kingdom? How would you classify this organism? 
Use scientific reasoning to explain what you have observed.
5	 Draw and label a diagram of Euglena, using your interpretation of the organism you have seen 
under the microscope. Use scientific reasoning to deduce the functions of the structures you 
have observed, and then annotate the diagram to explain these features.
Differences in eukaryotic cell structure between 
animals, fungi and plants
As well as the organelles that occur in all eukaryotic cells, there are structures that are only found in 
particular types of cell.
 
■Structures typically found in animal cells (and some protists)
Animal cells have organelles not present in plant cells. These will be explored now.
Centrioles
A centriole is a tiny organelle consisting of nine sets of three microtubules each (see page 72), 
arranged in a short, hollow cylinder. In animal cells, two centrioles occur at right-angles, just outside 
the nucleus, forming the centrosome (which can be seen in Figure A2.2.28). Before an animal cell 
divides, the centrioles replicate, and their role is to grow the spindle fibres – the spindle is the 
structure responsible for the movement of chromosomes during nuclear division.
   
 
■Figure A2.2.28 Electron micrograph of a cell showing two centrioles (in red)  
at right angles to each other, forming a centrosome
Concept: 
Diversity
Although some 
cellular structures 
are common to all 
eukaryotic cells, 
there are structures 
that are only found 
in particular types 
of cell, which 
relate to functional 
differences 
between different 
groups of organisms 
(kingdoms).
	
◆Centriole: a small 
cylindrical organelle 
which occurs in pairs; 
located near the nucleus 
in animal cells; involved in 
the production of spindle 
fibres during cell division.
	
◆Centrosome: 
organelle situated near 
the nucleus in animal 
cells, involved in the 
formation of the spindle 
prior to nuclear division.
	
◆Spindle: structure 
formed from 
microtubules, associated 
with the movements of 
chromosomes in mitosis 
and meiosis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
76
Cilia and flagella
Cilia (singular, cilium) and flagella (singular, flagellum) are made up of microtubules (see 
Figure A2.2.24) and are almost structurally identical, except that cilia are usually shorter and more 
numerous than flagella. They are organelles that project from the surface of certain cells and both 
can move.
Cilia occur in large numbers on certain cells, such as the ciliated lining (epithelium) of the air tubes 
serving the lungs (bronchi), where they cause the movement of mucus across the cell surface. It is 
the cilia of this ‘bronchial tree’ that cigarette smoke destroys over time. They are also found inside 
the oviduct where they help move the egg (ovum) from the ovary to the uterus. Cilia are also found 
in some protists (e.g. Euglena and Paramecium). Flagella occur singly, typically on small, motile cells, 
such as sperm, or they may occur in pairs.
A cilium is about 10 µm in length and 0.2 µm in diameter. A flagellum is about 100 µm in length and 
0.2 µm in diameter. Both contain a ring of nine microtubule doublets surrounding a central pair of 
microtubules (9 + 2 arrangement). Both contain a basal body at the base of each cilium or flagellum. 
Basal bodies are identical in structure to centrioles and help anchor the cilia and flagella to the cell.
 
■Structures typically found in plant cells (and some protists)
Just as animal cells have structures not present in plant cells, plants contain organelles that are not 
present in animal cells.
Chloroplasts
Chloroplasts are large organelles, typically biconvex in shape, about 4–10 μm long and 2–3 μm wide. 
They occur in green plants, where most occur in the mesophyll cells of leaves. A mesophyll cell may be 
packed with 50 or more chloroplasts. Photosynthesis is the process that occurs in chloroplasts. 
Look at the chloroplasts in the electron micrograph in Figure A2.2.29. In each chloroplast, two continuous 
membranes form the envelope. A third system of membranes is tucked to form a system of branching 
membranes called lamellae or thylakoids. The thylakoids are arranged in flattened circular 
piles called grana (singular, granum). These look a little like a stack of coins. It is here that the 
chlorophylls and other pigments are located. Most chloroplasts incorporate several grana, and the 
number of membranes present in each ‘stack’ is larger in leaves grown at lower light levels. Between 
them, the branching membranes are very loosely arranged in an aqueous matrix, usually containing 
small starch grains. This part of the chloroplast is called the stroma.
Chloroplasts are one of a larger group of organelles called plastids. Plastids are found in many plant 
cells but never in animals. The other members of the plastid family are leucoplasts (colourless 
plastids) in which starch is stored, and chromoplasts (coloured plastids), containing non-
photosynthetic pigments such as carotene, and occurring in flower petals and the root tissue of 
carrots, and anthocyanin which shades and protects the photosynthetic apparatus by absorbing 
excess visible and UV light.
Permanent vacuole
A vacuole is a fluid-filled space within the cytoplasm (see 
Figures A2.2.15 and A2.2.18, pages 64 and 68), surrounded by 
a single membrane (called a tonoplast). The tonoplast separates 
the contents of the vacuole from the cell’s cytoplasm. The main 
functions of vacuoles include maintaining cell turgor pressure 
and regulating waste. As the vacuole fills with water, it pushes 
the cytoplasm against the cell wall, creating turgor pressure 
in the cells which maintains the rigidity of plant tissue.  
Link
For more on 
photosynthesis, 
see Chapter C1.3, 
page 425.
	
◆Cilium (plural, cilia): 
motile, hair-like outgrowth 
from the surface of certain 
eukaryotic cells, which 
move rhythmically to 
propel objects such as 
mucus in the trachea and 
eggs in oviducts.
	
◆Flagellum (plural, 
flagella): a long, thin 
structure occurring singly 
or in groups on some 
cells and tissues; used 
to propel unicellular 
organisms and to move 
liquids past anchored cells 
(flagella of prokaryotes and 
eukaryotes have a different 
internal structure).
	
◆Chloroplast: 
organelle that is the site 
of photosynthesis and 
contains chlorophyll.
	
◆Thylakoid: membrane 
system of chloroplast.
	
◆Granum (plural, 
grana): stacked discs 
of membranes found 
within the chloroplast, 
containing the 
photosynthetic pigments, 
and the site of the 
light-dependent reaction 
of photosynthesis.
	
◆Stroma: colourless 
fluid contents of 
the chloroplast; 
site of the light-
independent reaction 
of photosynthesis.
	
◆Plastid: an organelle 
containing pigments 
(e.g. chloroplast).
	
◆Vacuole: fluid-filled 
space in the cytoplasm, 
especially large and 
permanent in plant cells.
	
◆Tonoplast: membrane 
around the plant cell 
vacuole.
 
■Figure A2.2.29 The chloroplast


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
77
Ions in the sap within the vacuole provide the negative osmotic pressure (or potential) that draws water 
molecules into the vacuole (see Chapter D2.3, page 692). Chemicals can be permanently stored in 
the vacuole, such as pigments (for example, betalains, the red pigment in beetroot). Carbohydrates, 
proteins and fats are stored in the vacuoles of storage cells in seeds. In addition, the vacuole functions 
in a similar way to lysosomes in animal cells – waste material is moved there for disposal. The 
environment inside a vacuole is slightly acid (about pH 5.0), allowing hydrolase enzymes to break 
down large molecules. The products of the breakdown process are retained within the vacuole.
Top tip!
Plant cells frequently have a large, permanent vacuole present. By contrast, animal cells may have 
small vacuoles, but these are mostly temporary.
 
■Extracellular components
We have noted that the contents of cells are contained within the plasma membrane. However, cells 
may secrete material outside the plasma membrane; for example, plant cells have an external wall, 
while many animal cells secrete glycoproteins.
The cell wall
The plant cell differs from an animal cell in that it is surrounded by a wall. This wall is completely 
external to the cell; it is not an organelle. Plant cell walls are primarily constructed of cellulose – a 
polysaccharide and an extremely strong material. Cellulose molecules are very long and are arranged 
in bundles called microfibrils (discussed in Chapter B1.1, page 193).
Cell walls make the boundaries of plant cells easy to see when plant tissues are examined by 
microscopy. The presence of this strong structure allows the plant cell to develop high internal 
pressure due to water uptake, without danger of the cell bursting. This is a major difference between 
the cell water relations of plants and animals.
Cell walls are also found in fungi (see more below) and prokaryotic cells, although the chemicals 
used in the construction of the walls are different in each case.
15	Discuss, in tabular 
form, the location 
of membranes 
and their function 
within plant and 
animal cells.
16	Outline the 
functions of the cell 
wall in a plant cell.
17	Describe how a 
typical plant cell 
differs from a 
typical animal cell.
Common 
mistake
Cell walls are not only 
found in plant cells – 
prokaryote cell walls 
exist as well, and cell 
walls are also part of 
fungal cell structure.
Extracellular glycoproteins around animal cells
Many animal cells can adhere to one other. This property enables cells to form 
compact tissues and organs. Other animal cells occur in simple sheets or layers, 
attached to a basement membrane below them. These cases of adhesion are brought 
about by glycoproteins that the cells have secreted. Glycoproteins are large 
molecules of protein to which a small number of sugar molecules bonded together 
(called oligosaccharides) are attached by covalent bonding.
 
■Fungal cells
Fungi are a large group of eukaryotic organisms that obtain their food by absorbing 
nutrients from their external environment. They cannot photosynthesize as they 
do not contain chloroplasts. Fungal cells have a cell wall but are made of a different 
material compared to plants and bacteria – chitin. The majority are multicellular, 
although some, such as yeast, are unicellular.
The cell structure of yeast is shown in Figure A2.2.30.
1 μm
cell wall 
(made of chitin)
cell 
membrane
cytoplasm
vacuole
nucleus
 
■Figure A2.2.30 Diagram of a yeast 
cell; yeast is a single-celled fungus
	
◆Glycoprotein: 
membrane protein with 
a carbohydrate chain 
attached.
18	Compare and contrast the 
structure of plant, animal and 
fungal cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
78
Top tip!
Some bacteria have flagella for movement, although the structure is different to those in animals.
Atypical cell structure in eukaryotes
Although most organisms conform to the cell theory (page 50), there are exceptions. In addition to the 
familiar unicellular and multicellular organization of living things, there are a few multinucleate organs 
and organisms that are not divided into separate cells. These are known as atypical cells. An example of 
an atypical organism is the mould Mucor, in which the main body of the organism consists of fine, 
thread-like structures called hyphae (Figure A2.2.31). An example of an atypical organ is the striped 
muscle fibres that make up the skeletal muscles of mammals (Figure A2.2.32). 
	
◆Multinucleate: 
a cell that has two or 
more nuclei.
	
◆Hypha: the tubular 
filament ‘plant’ body 
of a fungus, which in 
certain species is divided 
by cross walls into either 
multicellular or unicellular 
compartments.
fungal hyphae
diagram of the cell structure at the tip of one hypha
cell wall
mitochondrion
vacuole
ribosome
nucleus
cell membrane
stolon
sporangium
sporangiophore
hyphae
rhizoids
 
■Figure A2.2.31 Atypical structure in Mucor 
Another example of atypical cell structure is demonstrated by red 
blood cells (Figure A2.2.11, page 60). These cells have no nucleus. This 
adaptation allows more room for haemoglobin – the red pigment that 
carries oxygen in the blood and gives the cell its red colour. The lack 
of nucleus also creates a biconcave shape for the cell, which gives a 
greater surface area for the diffusion of oxygen into and out from the red 
blood cell. 
Phloem tissue transports sugars as sucrose in plants. Plant tissues will 
be explored in more detail in Theme B3, but for now we will focus on 
one cell type in the phloem – the sieve tube elements. Phloem tissue 
(Figure A2.2.33) consists of sieve tubes and companion cells. The 
sieve tube elements are another example of an atypical cell structure 
in eukaryotes.
each muscle fibre contains
several nuclei (i.e. a syncytium)
tendon
individual
muscle fibre (×300) 
bundle of thousands
of muscle fibres
skeletal muscle cut to show the bundles of fibres
 
■Figure A2.2.32 Atypical structure in 
skeletal muscle fibres of mammals


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
79
sieve tube with
sieve plate
companion cell
cytoplasm loses nucleus
and many organelles
phloem tubes are the site of movement 
of sugar and amino acids
photomicrograph of LS phloem in HP 
(×200) phloem is a tissue that may 
become crushed and damaged as stem 
tissue is sectioned for microscopy 
cytoplasmic connections
between companion cells
and sieve tube contents
sieve tube
sieve plate
in section
sieve plate
in face view
Sieve tubes are narrow, elongated elements, connected end to end to form tubes. There is no nucleus or  
many other organelles in the cytoplasm of a mature sieve tube. The end walls, known as sieve plates,  
are perforated by pores and each sieve tube is connected to a companion cell by strands of cytoplasm,  
called plasmodesmata, that pass through narrow gaps (called pits) in the walls. The companion cells are  
believed to service and maintain the cytoplasm of the sieve tube, because the sieve tubes have no nucleus. 
Top tip!
You may be asked to state the limitations of cell theory. These include:
l	 striated muscle cells contain many nuclei whereas most eukaryotic cells have one nucleus
l	 red blood cells have no nucleus whereas most eukaryotic cells have one nucleus
l	 multicellular fungi, such as Mucor, have multicellular hyphal cells
l	 sieve tube elements in phloem tissue do not contain a nucleus, and rely on companion cells to 
provide metabolic support
l	 viruses have some characteristics of living organisms but are not cells. 
If all cells come from pre-existing cells, where did the first one come from?
Cell types and structures viewed in 
light and electron micrographs
You should be able to identify cells in light or electron micrographs as prokaryote, plant or animal. 
In electron micrographs, you should be able to identify these structures: nucleoid region (see 
Figure A2.2.18, page 68), prokaryotic cell wall, nucleus, mitochondrion, chloroplast, sap vacuole, 
Golgi apparatus, rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, chromosomes, ribosomes, cell wall, 
plasma membrane and microvilli.
 
■Figure A2.2.33 The 
structure of phloem tissue


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
80
electron micrograph of an exocrine 
gland cell of the mammalian pancreas
electron micrograph of a spongy mesophyll cell
 
■Figure A2.2.34 Electron micrographs of named animal and plant cells 
Electron micrographs can be used to show structures not visible by light microscopy, such as 
microvilli present on the surface of epithelial cells in the small intestine (Figure A2.2.35).
 
■Figure A2.2.35 Electron micrograph of a specialized cell in tissue lining the small intestine (×4500) 
Drawing and annotating based 
on electron micrographs
You should be able to draw and annotate diagrams of organelles (nucleus, mitochondria, 
chloroplasts, sap vacuole, Golgi apparatus, RER and SER, and chromosomes) as well as 
other cell structures (cell wall, plasma membrane, secretory vesicles and microvilli) shown in 
electron micrographs.
19	Examine 
the electron 
micrographs of 
specialized animal 
and plant cells in 
Figure A2.2.34. 
a	 List the 
organelles 
common to 
the animal 
and plant cells 
illustrated in 
Figure A2.2.34. 
Annotate your 
list by recording 
the principal 
role or function 
of these 
structures. 
b	 List separately 
any organelles 
you observe to 
be present only 
in the plant cell.
	ATL A2.2E 
Identify the features 
of structure in the cell 
in Figure A.2.2.35 – its 
shape, size and the 
organelles present. 
Based on these 
observations, deduce 
the specialized role of 
the cell, giving your 
reasons.
microvilli
nuclei


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A2.2   Cell structure
81
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Drawing annotated diagrams from observation
For a clear, simple drawing:
l	 use a sharp HB pencil and a clean eraser
l	 use unlined paper and a separate sheet for each 
specimen you record
l	 draw clear, sharp outlines, avoiding shading or 
colouring (density of structures may be represented 
by degrees of stippling)
l	 label each drawing with appropriate information, 
such as the species, conditions (living or stained; 
if stained, note which stain was used) and type 
of section (transverse section, TS, or longitudinal 
section, LS)
l	 label your drawing fully, with labels well clear of 
the structures shown, remembering that label lines 
should not cross
l	 annotate (add notes about function, role and 
development) if appropriate
l	 include a statement of the magnification under 
which the specimen has been observed.
Figure A2.2.36 shows an interpretive drawing of a liver 
cell and the original TEM photo on which it is based.
 
■Figure A2.2.36 
Transmission electron 
micrograph of a mammalian 
liver cell (×15 000) with 
interpretive drawing
    
nucleus – controls and directs 
the activities of the cell
interpretive drawing
rough
endoplasmic
reticulum (RER)
vesicles
Golgi apparatus
lysosomes
mitochondria
ribosomes
nucleolus – site where 
ribosomes are synthesized
Common 
mistake
Many students 
mistakenly think that 
the organelles (e.g. 
chloroplasts and 
mitochondria) are cells 
with cell membranes, 
cell walls or even 
nuclei. Look carefully at 
electron micrographs 
and the information 
provided before you 
answer a question 
on organelles.
Top tip!
When drawing organelles and other cell structures, you need to include the functions in your annotations.
Top tip!
When drawing eukaryotic cells, follow this guidance:
l	 Cell walls should be shown with two continuous lines to indicate the thickness.
l	 Cell membranes should be shown as a single continuous line.
l	 Chromosomes can either be drawn as single lines or ‘X’ shaped, indicating two chromatids 
joined by a centromere in a cell about to divide.
l	 When drawing a plant cell or fungal cell, do not forget to add a single line to represent the 
membrane directly beneath the cell wall.
l	 Nuclear membranes should be shown with a double membrane and nuclear pores.
l	 Vacuole membranes should be shown as a single continuous line.
l	 Chloroplasts should be shown with a double line to indicate the envelope and internal structure 
(thylakoids/grana).
l	 Mitochondria should be shown with a double membrane (indicating cristae).
l	 Avoid overlapping, multiple or discontinuous lines for structures that have a single continuous edge. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
82
Images of cells and tissues may be magnified, displayed, projected and saved for printing by the 
technique of digital microscopy. A digital microscope is used or, alternatively, an appropriate 
video camera is connected by microscope coupler or eyepiece adaptor that replaces the standard 
microscope eyepiece. Images are displayed via video recorder, TV monitor or computer, and may be 
printed out by the latter. 
20	Draw and annotate a representation of the electron micrograph of the spongy 
mesophyll cell in Figure A2.2.34, using the interpretive drawing of an animal cell in Figure 
A2.2.36 as a model, and following the guidelines on biological drawing on page 81.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data
Draw, label and annotate the cell shown in 
Figure A2.2.37.
 
■Figure A2.2.37 Electron micrograph 
of a cell, ×70 000, colourized 
What kingdom is the cell from? What evidence did you 
use to reach this conclusion?
Notice that the magnification of this electron 
micrograph is recorded. Using this information, it 
is possible to estimate the actual length of the cell, 
expressed in μm.
Draw a table with two columns and ten rows.
l	 In the first column, list the organelles whose 
structure and roles are explained in this section, 
pages 68–77.
l	 Then record the presence of each type of organelle 
that you can confidently identify in the cell by 
means of a tick.
Remember, a section through a cell is likely to expose 
some, but not necessarily all, of the organelles present, 
especially if their numbers are limited. Illustrations 
such as Figure A2.2.18 on page 68 are idealized 
representations of the complete range of organelles of 
eukaryotic cells.
Origin of eukaryotic cells by endosymbiosis
Prokaryote cells differ from microspheres (see Figure A2.1.5 on page 41) in a number of ways. For 
example, attached to the plasma membrane in the prokaryote cell is a circular chromosome of 
DNA. Also, a cell wall of complex chemistry is secreted outside the membrane barrier. However, 
the first prokaryotes could have survived nutritionally on the organic molecules of the pre-biotic 
‘soup’. In this early environment, with its abundance of organic molecules surrounding simple cells, 
‘digestion’ and ‘respiration’ would have demanded limited enzymatic machinery. These biochemical 
sophistications would have to evolve with time – if life originated in this manner.
Present-day prokaryotes appear similar to fossil prokaryotes, some of which are 3500 million years 
old. By comparison, the earliest eukaryote cells date back only 1000 million years. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.2   Cell structure
83
How did eukaryotic cells arise?
The origin of eukaryotic cells can be explained by the endosymbiotic theory (Figure A2.2.38) 
proposed by Lynn Margulis in 1967. Evidence suggests that all eukaryotes evolved from a common 
unicellular ancestor that had a nucleus and reproduced sexually. The eukaryotic cell may have formed 
from large prokaryote cells that came to contain their chromosome in a sac of infolded plasma 
membrane. If so, a distinct nucleus was now present. But how did the other organelles originate? 
Remember, membranous organelles are a feature of eukaryotes, additional to their discrete nucleus.
	ATL A2.2F 
Research has shown that some genes or DNA sequences in mitochondria are similar to those 
found in a photosynthetic bacterium. What is the biochemistry of this bacterium? Why was 
photosynthesis lost and respiration retained in these primitive mitochondria (proto-mitochondria)? 
Use this paper as a starting point for your research: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1634775
Common 
mistake
A common error 
in explaining 
endosymbiosis is to 
say that the original 
engulfing process 
was carried out by a 
eukaryote, rather than a 
prokaryote. The theory 
of endosymbiosis states 
that a larger prokaryotic 
cell engulfed smaller 
prokaryotic cells, 
ultimately forming the 
first eukaryotic cell. 
prokaryotic cell
nuclear membrane and
endoplasmic reticulum
formed by intucking of
plasma membrane
ancestral eukaryotic plant
cell with chloroplasts
ancestral eukaryotic
cell with mitochondria
free-living cyanobacteria
(photosynthetic prokaryotes)
free-living 
aerobic bacteria
In the evolution of the eukaryotic cell, prokaryotic cells (which had been taken up into food vacuoles 
for digestion) may have survived as organelles inside the host cell, rather than becoming food items. 
The double membrane of the mitochondrion is the result of endocytosis (the outer membrane 
originating from the food vacuole and the inner membrane of the mitochondrion from the engulfed 
cell). The engulfed prokaryotic cells were not destroyed or digested and would have become 
integrated by natural selection into the biochemistry of their ‘host’ cell over time. An ‘endosymbiotic’ 
(or mutualistic) relationship developed. 
Top tip!
Endocytosis would have allowed a free-living prokaryote to enter and remain in a host prokaryotic 
cell. Because the prokaryote made itself useful, for example providing energy in the case of an 
aerobic prokaryote, there was a selective advantage in developing a mutualistic relationship rather 
than digesting the engulfed cell.
	
◆Endosymbiotic 
theory: theory that 
suggests that some 
organelles in eukaryotic 
cells, e.g. mitochondria 
and chloroplasts, 
were once free-living 
prokaryotic microbes that 
were incorporated into an 
ancestral host cell.
21	Explain why we 
can expect that, of 
all the fossils found 
in sedimentary 
rock, eukaryotic 
fossils in the lowest 
strata may bear the 
least resemblance 
to present-day 
forms.
 
■Figure A2.2.38 Origin of the eukaryotic cell


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
84
 
■Table A2.2.5 Evidence for the endosymbiotic theory
Unicellular organisms are known to inhabit larger eukaryotic cells. 
For example, green algae (Chlorella – see page 74) are known 
to form mutualistic endosymbiotic relationship with species of 
Paramecium (page 74).
Chloroplasts and mitochondria reproduce by binary fission, just as 
prokaryotes do.
Chloroplasts and mitochondria contain circular DNA (not associated 
with histone proteins), like that of prokaryotes.
Chloroplasts and mitochondria contain 70S ribosomes, also found 
in prokaryotes.
Chloroplasts and mitochondria transcribe mRNA from their 
DNA and synthesize specific proteins in their ribosomes, as 
prokaryotes do.
Chloroplasts and mitochondria are similar in size to prokaryotes.
Chloroplasts and mitochondria have double membranes: double 
membrane suggests engulfing by endocytosis.
This theory explains why mitochondria (and chloroplasts) 
contain a loop of naked DNA, together with 70S ribosomes, 
just like a bacterial cell. It is these features that suggest these 
organelles are descendants of free-living prokaryotic organisms 
that came to inhabit larger cells. 
The nature of the engulfed cell would have determined their 
role in the cell:
l	 If the engulfed prokaryotic cell respired aerobically, 
consuming oxygen, it would have provided the host cell 
with energy in the form of ATP, and formed mitochondria.
l	 If the engulfed cell could photosynthesize, it would have 
formed chloroplasts. 
This concept is known as the endosymbiotic origin of 
eukaryotes (Table A2.2.5).
Top tip!
Evidence that mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved by endosymbiosis include the presence of 
70S ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts, naked circular DNA and the ability to replicate.
Top tip!
You should recognize that the strength of a theory comes from the observations the theory explains 
and the predictions it supports. A wide range of observations are accounted for by the theory of 
endosymbiosis.
Nature of science: Theories
Factors which determine the strength of 
a theory
A scientific theory not only explains known observations and 
data; it also allows scientists to make predictions of what they 
should observe. Scientific theories must be testable. New 
observations should support the theory and, if they do not, 
then the theory must be modified or rejected. The longer the 
central features of a theory hold, the more observations and 
data it predicts, the more tests it passes, the more it explains, 
then the stronger the theory.
The evolutionary origins of eukaryotes can be grouped into 
autogenous theories and endosymbiotic theories. 
Although both theories involve natural selection, they provide 
different explanations and novel predictions.
In autogenous theories, it is suggested that all the structures 
and functions of eukaryotes evolved gradually from a single 
ancestor of prokaryotes. One common feature of autogenous 
theories is the proposed infolding of regions of the cell 
membrane forming internal vesicles, which subsequently 
evolved into the various organelles. 
However, the presence of DNA in the mitochondria and 
chloroplast cannot be explained by most autogenous theories. 
The presence of extra-nuclear DNA in mitochondria and 
chloroplasts was discovered indirectly in the 1960s and 
1970s. American evolutionary biologist Margulis carried 
out experiments providing indirect evidence for DNA in the 
cytoplasm of algae (i.e. in the chloroplast). 
In endosymbiotic theories it is believed that certain eukaryotic 
organelles evolved from prokaryotic organisms, which entered 
into symbiosis with an ancestor of eukaryotic cells (the proto-
eukaryote). 
The most widely accepted and supported variant of the 
endosymbiosis theory hypothesizes that the mitochondrion 
and chloroplast evolved from bacteria. There is a broad range 
of biochemical, molecular and cell structural data to strongly 
support this theory of endosymbiosis, especially for the 
chloroplast evolving from cyanobacteria.
However, debate continues about the exact nature of 
the bacteria that were involved in the evolution of the 
mitochondrion in the proto-eukaryote. Margulis also proposed 
that the eukaryotic flagellum originated by a process of 
endosymbiosis, but very little evidence supports this proposal.
22	Explain what 
is meant by the 
‘endosymbiont 
theory’.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.2   Cell structure
85
The discovery of DNA in mitochondria and chloroplasts was 
supportive of the endosymbiont hypothesis, but it was the 
later evolutionary analysis of the mitochondrial and chloroplast 
genomes themselves that provided the strongest evidence for 
the theory.
The DNA sequences of chloroplasts were most similar to those 
of free-living photosynthetic cyanobacteria (as one would 
predict based on their shared photosynthetic properties, 
pigmentation, etc.), while the mitochondrial DNA was clearly 
bacterial but did not initially have a strong connection to a 
specific type of bacteria. 
Around the 1980s it started to become clear that mitochondrial 
DNA was specifically linked to alphaproteobacteria (a large and 
diverse taxon of bacteria) and Rickettsiales (Figure A2.2.39) 
(non-motile, gram-negative bacteria associated with disease) in 
particular, and this result has stood the test of time.
 
■Figure A2.2.39 Rickettsia rickettsii
Cell differentiation and the development of 
specialized tissues in multicellular organisms
We have seen that unicellular organisms, although structurally simple, carry out all the functions 
and activities of life within a single cell. The cell takes in nutrients, respires, excretes, is sensitive to 
internal and external conditions (and may respond to them), may move, and eventually divides or 
reproduces (page 73).
By contrast, most multicellular organisms – all animals and plants, the majority of fungi and seaweeds 
in the Protoctista – are made of cells, most of which are highly specialized to perform a particular role 
or function (Figure A2.2.40). Specialized cells are organized into tissues and organs. A tissue is a group 
of similar cells that are specialized to perform a particular function, such as the heart muscle tissue of a 
mammal or phloem tissue in plants (see page 79). An organ is a collection of different tissues which 
performs a specialized and coordinated function, such as the heart of a mammal or the leaf of plants. 
So, the tissues, organs and organ systems of multicellular organisms consist of specialized cells.
pavement epithelium
a smooth, strong sheet
of cells
smooth muscle
(circular and
longitudinal) can
contract and relax
repeatedly for
long periods
without fatigue
Two of the many tissues that make up
the gut are illustrated here.
TS small intestine, low power [LP]
attachment to
body wall
peritoneum
(smooth lining)
connective tissue
(binds together
all the tissues)
villi (finger-like
projections into
the channel of
the gut)
 
■Figure A2.2.40 Tissues of part of the mammalian gut
	
◆Tissue: collection of 
cells of similar structure 
and function.
	
◆Organ: a part of an 
organism, consisting of 
a collection of tissues, 
having a definite form 
and structure, and 
performing one or more 
specialized functions.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
86
Cells in a multicellular organism, though they all contain the same DNA, are differentiated to 
carry out specialised functions. They express (‘switch on’) different sets of genes according to their 
developmental history and to the signals they receive from their environment. These changes in gene 
expression are often triggered by changes in the environment of the cell. 
 
■Control of cell specialization
We have seen that the nucleus of each cell is the structure that controls and directs the activities 
of the cell. The information required for this exists in the form of a nucleic acid, DNA. The nucleus 
of a cell contains the DNA in thread-like chromosomes, which are linear sequences of genes 
(Chapter A1.2, page 14). Genes control the development of each cell within the mature organism. We 
can define a gene in different ways, including:
l	 a specific region of a chromosome which is capable of determining the development of a specific 
characteristic of an organism
l	 a specific length of the DNA double helix (hundreds or thousands of base pairs long) which 
codes for a protein.
When a cell is becoming specialized, we say the cell is differentiating: some of its genes are being 
activated and expressed. These genes determine how the cell develops. In Chapter D2.2 (page 670)  
we explore both what happens during gene expression and the mechanism by which a cell’s 
chemical reactions are controlled. For now, we can just note that the nucleus of each cell contains all 
the information required to make each type of cell present within the whole organism; only a 
selected part of that information is needed in any one cell and tissue. How a cell specializes, and 
which genes are activated, are controlled by the immediate environment of the differentiating cell 
and the cell’s position in the developing organism.
 
■Differences between the proteomes of cells within a 
multicellular organism
The proteome of an organism is the totality of proteins expressed within a cell, tissue or organism 
at a certain time. Because the genome – the whole of the genetic information of an organism – is 
unique to each individual, the proteome it expresses is also unique. 
The genome is the same in all the cells of an organism because all cells in a multicellular organism 
are ultimately derived from one original cell, by cell division. The genome instructs the expression 
of proteins. Because individual tissues have specific structures relating to their function, different 
proteins are expressed in each specific tissue cell type. Specific genes are expressed (turned on or 
off) in different cells, according to a required function. As the proteome is all the proteins produced 
by a cell, the proteome varies with the function, location or environmental conditions of the cell 
through the process of cell differentiation.
 
■The cost of specialization
Specialized cells are efficient at carrying out their particular function, such as transport, support 
or protection. We say the resulting differences between cells are due to division of labour. By 
specialization, increased efficiency is achieved, but at a price. The specialized cells are now totally 
dependent on the activities of other cells. For example, in animals, nerve cells are adapted for the 
transport of nerve impulses but depend on red blood cells for oxygen, and on heart muscle cells to 
pump the blood. This modification of cell structure to support differing functions is another reason 
why no ‘typical’ cell really exists.
Common 
mistake
Differentiation of 
cells is often dealt 
with superficially: if 
asked about this in a 
question you need to 
refer to some genes 
being expressed and 
others suppressed, 
and not just say that 
‘cells specialize’. The 
strongest answers 
explain how cells use 
genes selectively and 
give specific examples 
of specialized tissue 
and their functions.
	
◆Proteome: the entire 
set of proteins expressed 
by a genome.
	
◆Division of labour: 
the carrying out of 
specialized functions by 
different types of cell in a 
multicellular organism.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.2   Cell structure
87
Evolution of multicellularity
Many fungi and eukaryotic algae and all plants and animals are multicellular, indicating that 
multicellularity has evolved repeatedly. The broad distribution of multicellular taxa across the 
eukaryotic tree of life suggests that multicellularity is relatively ‘easy’ to evolve with few barriers. 
The various mechanisms needed for multicellularity (e.g. cell adhesion, communication between 
cells and differentiation) found across taxa show that there are many ways it can evolve.  
Multicellularity has the advantages of allowing larger body size and cell specialization. The frequent 
occurrence of multicellularity is most probably due to strong selective pressures favouring it, the few 
genetic changes necessary to enable the change, or a combination of these factors. 
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What explains the use of certain molecular building blocks in all living cells?
2	 What are the features of a compelling theory?
