HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
88
A2.3
Viruses
•	 How can viruses exist with so few genes?
•	 In what way do viruses vary? 
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A2.3.1 	 Structural features common to viruses (HL only)
	 A2.3.2 	 Diversity of structure in viruses (HL only)
	 A2.3.3 	 Lytic cycle of a virus (HL only)
	 A2.3.4 	 Lysogenic cycle of a virus (HL only)
	 A2.3.5 	 Evidence for several origins of viruses from other organisms (HL only)
	 A2.3.6 	 Rapid evolution in viruses (HL only)
Introduction to viruses
All living organisms (eukaryotes and prokaryotes) have nucleic acids that make up their genomes. 
Viruses contain nucleic acids but require living cells to reproduce. This makes viruses obligate 
parasites as they can only reproduce within a host cell, since they do not have the ribosomes and 
metabolic enzymes necessary for protein synthesis. Viruses are known to infect all cellular organisms 
and are highly diverse in their shape and structure. They are classified according to their genome and 
life cycle (Figure A2.3.1). 
This topic will look at their common features, the diversity of their structures, the life cycles of 
viruses and the evidence of their origin and rapid evolution.
DNA viruses
1 single-stranded:
 ‘M13’ virus of
 bacterial hosts
 size: 500nm
2 double-stranded:
 herpes simplex virus
 of animal hosts
RNA viruses
1 single-stranded:
 poliovirus
 of animal hosts
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus, HIV (retrovirus)
2 double-stranded:
 reovirus of
 animal hosts
 size: 200nm
size: 25nm
size: 100nm
 size: 80nm
 
■Figure A2.3.1 A range of different viruses classified according to their nucleic acids
Unlike LUCA for cellular organisms (discussed on page 47), there is no presumed single common 
ancestor for viruses. One method of classifying viruses is based on the genome present in the virus. 
The nucleic acid present will be DNA or RNA, which will either be single or double stranded and 
with positive or negative polarity.
	
◆Virus: non-cellular 
parasite of animals, 
plants and bacteria that 
consists of nucleic acid 
surrounded by a protein 
coat (a capsid).
	
◆Parasite: an organism 
that lives on or in another 
organism (its host) for 
most of its life cycle, 
deriving nutrients from 
its host.
Common 
mistake
A common mistake is 
to say that a virus is a 
cell (cellular organism). 
In fact, a virus is 
considered ‘non-cellular’, 
meaning that no part 
of it is cellular. 
Top tip!
Viruses are not part of 
the Linnaean system 
of classification or the 
three domain system. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
89
Some infections are caused by micro-organisms, such as bacteria. Other infections are caused by 
viruses. However, bacteria and viruses have very different structures and life cycles. Table A2.3.1 
summarises the differences between bacteria (unicellular) and viruses (non-cellular).
 
■Table A2.3.1 Summary of the differences between viruses and bacteria
Characteristic
Viruses
Bacteria
Cellular
no
yes
Approximate diameter (μm)
0.02–0.2
1–5
Nucleic acid
either DNA or RNA; never both
both DNA and RNA
Ribosomes 
rarely present
70S
Nature of outer surface
protein capsid and lipoprotein 
envelope (for some)
cell wall containing peptidoglycan
Motility (movement)
none
some (via rotating flagella)
Method of replication
viral replication (protein synthesis 
followed by self-assembly) inside cells
binary fission (generally outside cells)
Nature of science: Observations and science as a shared endeavour
Predicting the existence of viruses
Viruses were first observed in 1931 when electron microscopes 
were developed, but scientists had already hypothesized their 
existence based on careful observations. Researchers used 
special, fine filters to remove bacteria from tissues that were 
infected. If bacteria were causing the infection, the filtered 
tissues should no longer be able to make other organisms sick. 
However, the filtered tissues remained infective. This meant 
an infectious micro-organism much smaller than bacteria was 
causing the infection. In 1915, English bacteriologist Frederick 
Twort discovered bacteriophages, the group of viruses whose 
host cells are bacteria. He observed tiny clear spots within 
bacterial colonies and hypothesized that an organism was 
killing the bacteria.
Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur developed the first vaccines, 
even though they did not know viruses existed as they were 
too small to detect with a compound light microscope. Jenner 
developed the first vaccine against smallpox in 1798. At the 
time, many people who got smallpox died. However, those 
who had earlier contracted cowpox never died. (Workers who 
handled cows typically caught cowpox at some stage.) Jenner 
saw the significance of the protection the patients had acquired. 
He extracted fluid from a cowpox pustule on an infected 
milkmaid, and injected it into himself and into the arm of an 
eight-year-old boy. The child got a mild cowpox infection but, 
when exposed to smallpox, remained healthy. Jenner named 
this technique vaccination (after the Latin ‘vacca’, which means 
cow). Of course, he did not understand the cause of smallpox; 
the chemical nature of viruses was not reported until 1935.
Almost 90 years after Jenner’s smallpox vaccine, Pasteur 
developed the first vaccine against rabies. Pasteur was looking 
for what caused rabies and thought it could be a pathogen 
too small to be detected with a microscope (at the time). 
Knowledge about viruses therefore goes back before 1931, 
before viruses were first observed, even if scientists did not 
know what viruses were. 
The discovery of viruses led to a whole new research field 
– one that is a shared international endeavour. Today, the 
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), 
formed in 1966, coordinates the development, refinement 
and maintenance of virus taxonomy. The ICTV has developed 
a universal taxonomic scheme for viruses, aiming to accurately 
describe, name and classify every virus that infects living 
organisms. It uses a slightly modified version of the standard 
Linnaean classification system to classify viruses – starting 
at order and going down to species. For example, HIV 
is in the Retroviridae family because it is a retrovirus and 
contains RNA and reverse transcriptase. It is in the subfamily 
Orthoretrovirinae because it is spherical and a tumour-causing 
virus in vertebrates. The ICTV maintains a database detailing 
the current knowledge and provides the database and other 
virus-related information to the public (see http://ictv.global).
Structural features common to viruses
Concept: Unity
All viruses have common structural features: small, fixed size; nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) 
as genetic material; a capsid made of protein; no cytoplasm; and few or no enzymes.
	
◆Micro-organism: 
a living organism that 
cannot be seen by the 
naked eye, such as 
bacteria, protists and 
single-celled fungi.
	
◆Capsid: the protein 
coat of a virus.
1	 State the 
differences in 
structure between 
a bacterial cell and 
a virus.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
90
There are relatively few features shared by all viruses. However, all viruses have the following features 
in common: 
l	 they are extremely small and have a fixed size range of 20–400 nm in diameter 
l	 they have nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) as genetic material
l	 a capsid made of protein surrounds the nucleic acid
l	 no cytoplasm 
l	 few or even no enzymes.
Common mistake
Viruses do not have a nucleus or nucleoid. These terms apply only to eukaryotes and prokaryotes. 
There is a viral genome, which consists of RNA or DNA. 
Diversity of structure in viruses
Viruses differ in many aspects from host range (the number of species and cell types that they can 
infect), to the type of genome, their structure and their method of replication. They are highly diverse 
in their shape and structure, as seen in Figure A2.3.2. 
 
■Figure A2.3.2 The diverse shapes of three different viruses: a) TEM of Marburg virus,  
b) coloured TEM of COVID-19 coronavirus particles, c) coloured TEM of bacteriophage lambda
a
b
c
	ATL A2.3A 
1	 The Biointeractive Virus explorer website www.biointeractive.org/classroom-resources/virus-explorer 
has three-dimensional models of ten different viruses including coronavirus, influenza A, HIV, 
tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) and adenovirus. Click on ‘start interactive’ to view the viruses. 
You can then click on each virus image to rotate them, view from different angles and see in 
cross-section. You can also explore diagrams of the viruses’ replication cycles. Suggest possible 
groupings for the different viruses based on their structure. What classification system would you 
use for these viruses?
2	 The Baltimore classification (first defined in 1971) is a classification system that places viruses into 
one of seven groups depending on a combination of their nucleic acid (DNA or RNA), whether 
they are single-stranded or double-stranded, and their method of replication. Use the internet 
to find out about the Baltimore classification of viruses and produce an annotated diagram as a 
poster outlining this approach to virus classification.
 
■The viral genome
DNA viruses include adenoviruses (one of the causes of eye diseases) and most bacteriophages 
(a virus that parasitizes bacteria). 
Concept: 
Diversity
Viruses are 
highly diverse in 
their shape and 
structure. Genetic 
material may be 
RNA or DNA, 
which can be 
either single- or 
double-stranded. 
Some viruses are 
enveloped in host 
cell membrane 
and others are 
not enveloped.
Top tip!
No virus has been 
found to contain 
ribosomes (except 
the Arenaviruses, but 
the ribosomes are 
not required for virus 
replication and their 
presence may simply 
be an inadvertent 
result of the 
packaging process). 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
91
The genetic code is shared between viruses and living organisms, meaning that the host cells 
transcribe their DNA into mRNA and then translate it into protein. RNA viruses include HIV 
and coronaviruses.
Common mistake
A coronavirus came to public attention in February 2020 when the World Health Organization 
(WHO) announced COVID-19 as the name of a new respiratory disease that was spreading rapidly. 
Many thought that the coronavirus itself was a new virus. However, coronaviruses were around 
prior to the 2019 pandemic; human coronavirus was first discovered in the 1960s. SARS-CoV-2, the 
virus which causes COVID-19 disease, is thought to have transferred from an animal host to humans 
in late 2019.
The RNA viruses can be divided again into two groups, depending on how their RNA is reproduced 
and used in the host cell. In some RNA viruses, e.g. SARS-CoV-2, nucleic acid replication occurs 
entirely in the cytoplasm, but influenza viruses replicate their RNA in the nucleus. In some viruses, 
e.g. HIV, their RNA is used as a template for synthesizing viral DNA in the cytoplasm, using a viral 
enzyme called reverse transcriptase. 
For viruses with an RNA genome, they may possess either positive-sense RNA (i.e. identical to viral 
mRNA and thus can be immediately translated into proteins by the host cell ribosomes) as SARS-
CoV-2 does, or negative-sense RNA (i.e. complementary to viral mRNA, so must be converted to 
positive-sense RNA by RNA polymerase before translation) as in influenza viruses.
The viral genome is either a linear molecule of nucleic acid, for example as in coronaviruses, or a 
circular molecule of nucleic acid, for example as in hepatitis B. In some viruses, the nucleic acid is 
single-stranded, as seen in the hepatitis E virus and coronaviruses. In others, however, it is double-
stranded, for example as in HIV and SV-40. Some kinds of viruses may have more than one copy of 
the genome, for example HIV and influenza viruses.
The genomes of some simple viruses, such as that of the bacteriophage Qbeta, are only a few 
thousand nucleotides in length and contain only four genes. Other viruses, particularly those with a 
complex structure, contain more genes. Bacteriophage T4 (see Figure A2.3.3) is an example of a virus 
having 289 genes. These extra genes are largely involved in the formation of the complex capsid.
	
◆Coronavirus: a large 
and diverse family of 
RNA viruses that cause 
respiratory diseases in 
animals and humans.
	
◆SARS-CoV-2: 
severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 
2, the virus that causes 
COVID-19.
	
◆Positive-sense RNA: 
viral RNA that has the 
same base sequence as 
mRNA, which allows it to 
function as a template for 
protein synthesis during 
viral replication. 
	
◆Negative-sense 
RNA: viral RNA that is 
complementary to mRNA 
(i.e. the antisense strand 
of the viral mRNA) and so 
it cannot directly encode 
for protein synthesis; it 
must be replicated to 
mRNA before protein 
production can begin. 
Viruses have a small genome, which makes them highly 
adapted for virus replication, in which each infected host cell 
produces many copies of the viral genome from a single DNA 
or RNA template. Rapid replication is favoured by a small 
genome size: the smaller the genome, the faster it can replicate.
The size of viral genomes also depends on the type of host cell. 
Viruses with prokaryotic host cells tend to replicate rapidly 
due to the high rate of binary fission. This is reflected in the 
compact nature of the genome with overlapping genes of many 
bacteriophages, leading to the minimum genome size.
 
■Figure A2.3.3 Coloured TEM of T4 bacteriophage
Top tip!
There is a roughly inverse relationship between genome 
size and dependence on the host for essential functions in 
DNA replication.  


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
92
Going further
A gene is usually defined as having a unique position on a chromosome. However, 
individual genes can overlap or share one or more nucleotides with adjacent genes – 
something initially discovered in viruses and mitochondria but now also known from 
bacteria and higher organisms.
 
■Capsid
The capsid (Figure A2.3.4) is a protein coat enclosing the viral genome. There are a variety of shapes 
of capsid, including helical (for example the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV)), conical (for example, HIV) 
and polyhedral (for example, adenovirus). Capsids are synthesized from many protein subunits 
called capsomeres. Some viruses carry viral enzyme molecules within their capsids. 
protein coat (capsid) of 
polypeptide building blocks 
arranged in a spiral around 
the canal containing RNA
position
of RNA
3’
5’
arrangement of single
strand of RNA in TMV
healthy
leaves
infected
leaf
transmission electron micrograph of TMV (×40 000) negatively stained
enlarged drawing of part of the virus
end view of virus
side view shows hollow
tube construction
 
■Figure A2.3.4 The tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), which infects the tobacco plant
Some of the most complex capsids are found among bacteriophages (phages). The capsids of phages 
have elongated icosahedral heads enclosing their genome. These are made of equilateral triangles 
fused together in a spherical shape, forming a 20-sided structure, which is the optimal way to form 
a closed shell using identical protein sub-units (Figure A2.3.5). The TEM image on page 91 shows 
the icosahedral head of a Phage T4 (Figure A2.3.3). Joined to the head is a tail shaft with fibres that 
the phages use to attach to a bacterial cell wall. Capsids protect the viral genome, but they are often a 
target of the immune system.
	
◆Capsomere: one of 
the individual proteins 
that make up a viral 
capsid.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
93
 
■Figure A2.3.5 Unfolded two-dimensional (left) and folded three-dimensional (right) icosahedron
 
■Envelope
Viruses can be classified as enveloped (for example, HIV, influenza viruses and coronaviruses) or 
non-enveloped (bacteriophages and poliovirus). The viral envelope encloses the nucleocapsids of 
many viruses that infect animals, for example HIV and coronaviruses.
Enveloped viruses contain host cell phospholipids, usually from the plasma membrane of the host 
cell embedded with virally-encoded spike glycoproteins. However, the coronaviruses take their 
envelope from internal membranes of the host cell rather than the plasma membrane. The viral 
envelope protects the virion from enzymes and other chemicals, giving them an advantage over 
virions with only a capsid. 
Glycoproteins on viral envelopes help viruses enter host cells by binding to receptor molecules on 
the cell surface. Virions recognize and bind to specific host proteins, resulting in possible uptake of 
virions into the cell. 
Nature of science: Patterns and trends
Measuring the infectivity of viruses 
For many years viruses could be studied only by observing the effects of virus-infected extracts on 
living animals. The effects of infection with virus are commonly the production of disease symptoms 
and pathological changes, such as tissue damage. An approximate measure of the infectivity of 
the virus-infected extract could be estimated by observing how far it could be diluted yet remain 
capable of causing infection in living animals. 
Viral reproductive life cycles
In this section we will look at two reproductive strategies, the lytic and lysogenic life cycles, using the 
example of bacteriophage lambda. 
The stages of viral reproduction are generally: 
l	 attachment (or adsorption) to host cells
l	 entry (or penetration) 
l	 replication of viral genome
l	 transcription of virus mRNA and protein synthesis using host cell ribosomes 
l	 maturation and assembly of viruses and release from host cell.
Virus particles cannot carry out life processes independently, and so use the mechanisms available 
within the host cell to carry out their functions. They rely on the host cell for energy supply, 
nutrition, protein synthesis and other life functions.
	
◆Envelope: a membrane 
typically from the host cell 
plasma membrane with 
viral glycoproteins.
	
◆Nucleocapsid: the 
capsid of a virus with 
an envelope.
	
◆Virion: an isolated 
but infectious virus 
particle found outside the 
host cell.
Link
Glycoproteins and 
phospholipids are 
covered in more detail 
in B1.1, pages 195–203, 
and B2.1, page 223 
and page 234.
Common 
mistake
A common 
misconception is that 
a virus can move 
independently. Viruses 
cannot move by 
themselves; they can 
only move passively 
through phloem, 
blood, other body 
fluids or the air. When 
they reach a host cell, 
they bind to receptors 
on the cell’s surface, 
which causes the virus 
particle to be drawn 
into the cell.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
94
 
■Bacteriophage lambda
Bacteriophages (or phages for short) are viruses that infect bacteria. 
They played a central role in the development of molecular biology, 
especially in our understanding of gene structure and expression. 
They are also important in the laboratory, providing a way in which 
genes can be transferred from one bacterium to another. With 
the development of gene cloning, phages were used as vectors for 
cloned DNA.
Bacteriophages are very specific in the bacteria they infect. 
Bacteriophage lambda (λ phage) (Figure A2.3.6) only infects E. coli. 
The wild type of this virus has a temperate life cycle that allows it 
to be in the bacterial genome through lysogeny or enter a lytic cycle 
during which it kills the bacterial cell. We will now look at the 
differences between lytic and lysogenic life cycles.
collar
core
sheath
conical part
tail fibre
double-stranded
linear DNA 
capsid
(isocahedral)
 
■Figure A2.3.6 Structure of bacteriophage lambda
 
■Lytic life cycle
The lytic cycle is one of the life cycles viruses can undergo. At the start of the reproductive life cycle, 
the tail fibre of the bacteriophage lambda binds to specific receptors on the surface of E. coli (a 
process called attachment) before injecting its genome (double-stranded DNA) into the host cell 
(Figure A2.3.7). The protein capsid is left outside. 
The entry of the viral DNA into the bacterium is known as penetration. The viral DNA remains 
as a separate molecule within the bacterial cell, rather than becoming incorporated with the host 
DNA, and replicates separately from the host bacterial DNA. The bacterial DNA is broken down via 
DNA hydrolysis, while the viral DNA is replicated and used to form new virus particles (a process 
called biosynthesis). Viral genes are expressed using host enzymes to produce viral proteins, which 
self-assemble to form mature bacteriophage lambda virions (maturation process). The release of 
bacteriophage lambda from its host E. coli cell involves the lysis of the bacterial cell wall, resulting in 
the death of the cell.
The lytic cycle results in the destruction of the infected cell and its membrane. Bacteriophages that 
only use the lytic cycle are called virulent phages.
1 The phage attaches to the surface
   of the bacterium (the host).
2 The phage is adsorbed onto
   the bacterium and injects its DNA.
3 The viral DNA enters
   the bacterium.
4 Phage DNA is replicated;
   bacterial DNA is broken down
   (i.e. DNA hydrolysis takes place).
5 Phage proteins are made
   and assembled to make
   many new phage particles.
6 The cells lyses (bursts)
   and the newly made
   phage particles
   are released.
phage virus
bacterium
bacterial DNA
	
◆Lytic: a phage life cycle 
where a phage attaches 
to a host bacterium, 
injects its DNA which 
undergoes replication to 
form new virions, which 
then lyse the cell.
	
◆Lysis: breakdown, 
typically of cells.
	
◆Virulent: the ability 
of a virus (or bacterium) 
to cause rapid and severe 
disease.
 
■Figure A2.3.7 An 
overview of the lytic 
cycle of a virus


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
95
 
■Lysogenic life cycle
In the lysogenic life cycle, the phage infects the bacteria cell by injecting its DNA into the cell 
(Figure A2.3.8). Viral DNA is incorporated into the host cell’s DNA to form a prophage. This is 
different to the lytic life cycle, where the viral DNA remains separate. A bacterial host with a 
prophage is called a lysogen, which is where the term lysogenic comes from. In the lysogenic life 
cycle, the bacteriophage’s viral DNA replicates together with the DNA of the E. coli host cell when it 
replicates, but since the prophage contains genes, it can give novel properties to E. coli.
Healthy bacteria grown in rich medium contain high levels of proteases (enzymes that break down 
proteins) and when infected are more likely to support lytic replication. The role of these enzymes 
is to catalyse the splitting of specific bonds in viral precursor protein or in cellular proteins – this is 
essential for the completion of the viral infectious cycle. In contrast, poorly growing bacteria have 
lower levels of proteases and so will encourage establishment of lysogeny.
1 The phage
   infects a cell. 
2 The phage DNA becomes incorporated
   into the host genome. Inserting
   viral DNA alters the genotype of the bacterium.
3 The cell divides. When the
   bacterial chromosome is copied,
   the phage’s DNA is also replicated
   and passed on to the daughter
   cells in reproduction.
4 Under stressful conditions,
   the phage DNA is removed
   from the bacterial chromosome
   and enters the lytic cycle.
5 Phage DNA replicates and
   phage proteins are made.
   New phage particles
   are assembled.
6 The cell lyses,
   releasing phages.
 
■Figure A2.3.8 An overview of the lysogenic cycle of a virus; note that the last two stages (5 and 6) are part of the lytic cycle
Nature of science: Experiments
Determining the concentration of bacteriophage particles
If a bacteriophage infects a liquid culture of bacteria, it may result in completely clearing the culture. 
However, if the bacteria are spread on the surface of an agar plate, the phages released from an 
individual infected cell will only be able to infect neighbouring bacteria, which will result in localized 
clearing of the bacterial lawn, referred to as plaques. This allows a biologist to determine the 
concentration of bacteriophage particles in a suspension (the phage titre), using the assumption that 
the number of plaques corresponds to the number of bacteriophage particles present in the sample. 
Top tip!
Bacteriophages that 
can adopt either a 
lytic or a lysogenic 
replication cycle are 
termed temperate 
phages.
2	 Distinguish 
between the lytic 
and lysogenic life 
cycles of a virus.
	
◆Lysogenic: a phage 
life cycle where a phage 
attaches to a bacterium 
and injects its genome, 
but it does not undergo 
a full replication cycle; 
instead it becomes resident 
within the bacterial host 
where it is maintained in a 
dormant state.
	
◆Prophage: a 
bacteriophage in an 
inactive state in which 
the genome is typically 
integrated into the 
chromosome of the 
bacterial host.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
96
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying general mathematics
The multiplicity of infection (MOI) is one factor that determines whether a virus enters 
the lytic cycle or lysogenic (dormant) phase.
MOI = number of infectious virus particles
number of target cells present
A scientist needed to use an MOI of 0.5 for an investigation.
The virus particles were at a concentration of 2 × 109 cm−3 and the bacteria were at a 
concentration of 8 × 108 cm−3.
Calculate the volume of virus particles that should be added to 0.25 cm3 of bacteria.
 
■Table A2.3.2 Summary of bacteriophage lambda
Feature
Description
Viral genome
linear DNA (with sticky ends) 
Capsid
complex capsid comprising of an icosahedral head, a tail sheath and one 
tail fibre
Envelope
naked virus (no envelope)
Host 
bacteria E. coli (gram-negative) 
Cycle 
lytic and lysogenic cycles 
Attachment 
tail fibre attaches to receptor on surface of host cell 
Entry/penetration 
(non-contractile) tail sheath inserts viral genome into host cell; capsid is 
left outside the host cell
Integration into host chromosome
integrated into bacterial host chromosome as prophage in the 
lysogenic cycle 
Degradation of host cell DNA
DNA of host cell is only degraded during the lytic stage 
Replication of viral genome 
lysogenic: prophage replicates with the host chromosomes as host cell 
undergoes binary fission 
lytic: host cell DNA polymerase used to replicate phage DNA 
Synthesis of viral proteins 
transcription and translation by host cell machinery 
Release 
when lytic cycle is induced, prophage is removed from bacterial host 
chromosome; osmotic lysis occurs and the death of host cell releases 
phage particles 
Evidence for several origins of 
viruses from other organisms
There are many different types of virus depending on the cells that they infect. It seems unlikely that 
all currently known viruses have a common ancestor. Many researchers hypothesize that viruses 
have probably arisen numerous times in the past by one or more mechanisms. 
Viruses are therefore considered to be polyphyletic in origin, meaning they have a few independent 
origins – almost certainly at different times from cellular organisms. Three main hypotheses have 
been suggested to explain the evolutionary origin of viruses.
The virus-first hypothesis suggests that viruses evolved before or co-evolved with their current host 
cells. Viruses may have come from bits of RNA that had self-complementary sequences, allowing it 
to fold itself like a protein. Gradually the bits of RNA became more complex and could later self-
replicate. They then began infecting other cells – becoming viruses.
3	 Discuss why 
viruses are 
considered non-
living and why 
they are obligate 
parasites. 
4	 Describe the role 
of the structural 
components 
of viruses. 
	ATL A2.3B 
Using the features in 
Table A2.3.2, research 
and create summary 
tables for SARS-CoV-2 
(COVID-19), influenza 
and HIV.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
97
The escaped genes (progressive) hypothesis (Figure A2.3.9) suggests that viruses arose from genetic 
elements that gained the ability to move between cells. Transposons are repetitive DNA sequences 
that can move between chromosomes in eukaryotes. 
single-celled organism
protein coat
protein-building
structure
RNA
two mini cells are
a result of unequal
cell division
cell cannot survive
cell survives because
of protein coat
virus
the cell is now able to replicate
itself and infect new organisms;
it is now a virus
 
■Figure A2.3.9 The escaped genes (progressive) hypothesis for the origin of viruses
The regressive (or reduction) hypothesis (Figure A2.3.10) suggests that viruses are remnants of 
cellular organisms (cells). 
protein-building
structure
RNA
the two organisms
form a mutualistic
relationship
the smaller organism
loses its protein-building
structures
virus
the smaller organism is able
to replicate itself and infect
new organisms; it is now a virus
single-celled
organism
 
■Figure A2.3.10 The regressive (reduction) hypothesis for the origin of viruses
Both the escaped genes and regressive hypotheses assume that cells existed before viruses, but some 
researchers have proposed that viruses may have been the first replicating entities (appearing before 
LUCA) involved in the origin of life on Earth.  
There is a huge range of diversity in viruses (with no gene shared by all viruses) and it has been 
argued that precursors of a group of viruses known as nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses 
(NCLDV) were involved in the emergence of eukaryotic cells. This group of newly discovered viruses 
has a large genome and the presence of genes involved in DNA repair, DNA replication, transcription 
and translation. They replicate in the host cell’s nucleus and cytoplasm. It is hypothesised that the 
nucleus in eukaryotic cells may have arisen from an endosymbiosis in which a complex, enveloped 
DNA virus became incorporated into an ancestral eukaryotic cell (see Chapter A2.2, page 82).
Some researchers hypothesise that NCLDV viruses evolved through a regressive process, during 
which their ancestral cells lost key genes and adopted an obligate parasite replication strategy. 
Their dependence on parasitism is likely to have caused the loss of genes that enabled them to 
survive outside a cell. The irreversible succession of gene losses may have been the dominant force in 
viral evolution.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
98
It is possible that no single hypothesis explains the origin of viruses. Certain viruses, such as the 
retroviruses, probably arose through a progressive process, when mobile genetic elements gained the 
ability to travel between cells, becoming infectious agents. On the other hand, large DNA viruses 
probably arose through a regressive process, whereby once-independent entities lost essential genes 
over time and adopted a parasitic replication strategy. It is also possible that all viruses arose via a 
mechanism that has yet to be discovered. 
Since all viruses share an extreme form of obligate parasitism on host cells, the structural features 
they have in common could be regarded as a form of convergent evolution. Convergent evolution 
occurs when species occupy similar ecological niches and adapt in similar ways in response to 
similar selective pressures. Traits that arise through convergent evolution are referred to as 
‘analogous structures’.
Rapid evolution of viruses 
The evolution rate in viruses can be defined as the number of nucleotide substitutions per nucleotide 
site, per year. Various factors affect the rate including mutations, recombination, large population size 
and a rapid life cycle.
 
■Mutation in viruses
Mutations are a natural by-product of viral replication. The mutations occur at a frequency 
determined by the error rate of the replication enzymes (and are then adjusted by the effect of any 
proofreading in the virus if it occurs). 
The success of the mutant after generation is then determined by whether it has any form of 
advantage in a Darwinian sense (i.e. if it has a selective advantage that enables the virus to survive).
The mutations that give variants a selective advantage regarding viral replication, transmission or 
evading the immune system of the host organism will increase in frequency, while those that reduce 
viral fitness will be removed from the population of circulating viruses.
The mutation of existing viruses is a major source of new diseases. RNA viruses tend to have an 
unusually higher rate of mutation compared to DNA viruses because errors in replicating their RNA 
genomes are not corrected by proofreading. Coronaviruses, however, have a lower mutation rate than 
most RNA viruses because they produce an RNA polymerase that corrects some of the errors made 
during replication. However, the viruses are evolving faster than their host cells, which gives the 
virus an advantage in overcoming the immune response.
 
■Case study: Influenza
The three types of influenza (flu) viruses are A, B and C. It is an enveloped virus with a genome 
made up of negative sense, single-stranded, segmented RNA. Influenza viruses infect the epithelial 
cells of the respiratory tract (and in birds the intestinal tract). The virions recognize their target cells 
by complementary binding of haemagglutinin (spike protein) in the viral envelope and specific sialic 
acid receptors on the cell plasma membrane.
Some mutations enable existing viruses to evolve into new strains that can cause disease in 
individuals who have developed immunity to the ancestral virus. Flu epidemics, for example, are 
caused by new strains of influenza virus genetically different enough from earlier strains that people 
have little immunity to them. 
Link
Convergent evolution 
and analogous 
structures are covered 
in more detail 
in Chapter A4.1, 
page 145.
Top tip!
Viruses are 
evolutionarily 
dynamic and respond 
to changes in the 
macroenvironment 
and microenvironment 
(the body and 
immune system). 
Top tip!
The term 
‘proofreading’ is used 
in genetics to refer to 
the error-correcting 
processes. 
Link
Evolution and 
Darwinism are 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter 
A4.1, page 138, 
and Chapter D4.1, 
page 779.
Top tip!
A variant describes 
a subtype or strain 
of a virus, e.g., delta 
and omicron variants 
of SARS-CoV-2, that 
is genetically distinct 
from the main strain, 
but not sufficiently 
different to be termed 
a distinct strain (e.g., 
influenza A, B, C 
and D). 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
99
Antigenic drift consists of mutations in the genes of influenza viruses that can lead to changes in 
the surface proteins of the virus: haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). The surface 
proteins of influenza virus particles are antigens. These proteins are recognized by the immune 
system and can trigger an immune response, including the production of antibodies that stop the 
development of disease. The changes associated with antigenic drift happen continually over time as 
influenza viruses replicate, leading to surface antigens that are no longer recognized by the immune 
system. This is turn leads to the development of disease and the signs and symptoms of an illness.
Antigenic shift (Figure A2.3.11) is a sudden major change in an influenza A virus, resulting in 
new haemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins. Antigenic shift can result in a new influenza A 
subtype. This process results in recombination, where DNA from different strains of the virus are 
recombined to produce new combinations of alleles.
If two different influenza viruses are present in the same cell, the newly produced viruses can take 
segments from either of the infecting viruses to make a new type of influenza virus.
Antigenic shift can happen if an influenza virus from an animal population gains the ability to 
infect humans. Such animal-origin viruses can contain haemagglutinin and neuraminidase protein 
combinations that are different enough from human viruses that most people will not have immunity 
to the novel virus.
different subtypes
of influenza A
new influenza A
subtype
different influenza A
strains
 antigenic drift
(random mutation)
antigenic shift
(genetic shuffling)
 
■Figure A2.3.11 Conceptual illustration of antigenic drift and antigenic shift
 
■Case study: HIV
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a condition caused by the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV (Figure A2.3.12) belongs to a small group of viruses known as 
retroviruses, which have a unique life cycle and mechanism of viral replication. A retrovirus is a 
type of virus that uses RNA as its genetic material. 
Having entering the cytoplasm of a host cell, the virus RNA is converted into DNA under the control 
of an enzyme called reverse transcriptase. The retrovirus then integrates its viral DNA into the 
DNA of the host cell’s nucleus to form a provirus.
HIV has a high mutation rate in its genome due to errors by reverse transcriptase, which lacks a 
proofreading mechanism. AIDS patients often carry many different genetic variants of HIV that are 
distinct from the original HIV virus that infected them. 
	
◆Antigenic drift: 
small changes (caused 
by mutations) in viral 
genes that can lead to 
changes in the surface 
proteins of a virus, HA 
(haemagglutinin) and NA 
(neuraminidase).
	
◆Antigenic shift: an 
abrupt, major change 
in an influenza A virus, 
resulting in new HA 
and/or new HA and NA 
proteins. Happens when 
recombination occurs.
	
◆Recombination: 
occurs when viruses of 
two different parent 
strains co-infect the same 
host cell and interact 
during replication to 
generate virus progeny 
that have some genes 
from both parent strains.
Link
HIV is covered in more 
detail in Chapter C3.2, 
page 529.
	
◆Retrovirus: a virus 
that has RNA as its nucleic 
acid and uses the enzyme 
reverse transcriptase to 
copy its genome into the 
DNA of the host cell’s 
chromosomes.
	
◆Reverse 
transcriptase: an 
enzyme found in HIV (and 
other retroviruses). HIV 
uses reverse transcriptase 
to convert its RNA into 
viral DNA, a process called 
reverse transcription.
	
◆Provirus: a virus that 
has integrated into a 
host’s genome and is 
replicated when the cell 
replicates its DNA.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Cells
100
This is a significant problem in treating the infection. Antiviral drugs that block essential viral 
enzymes work only temporarily, because new strains of the virus resistant to these drugs arise 
rapidly by mutation. 
However, combinations of drugs that target 
different virus proteins (typically three drugs with 
different targets) are highly effective at inhibiting 
the virus and preventing replication.
The population size of HIV is the total number of 
infectious proviruses integrated into the cellular 
DNA of an individual at a given time. The high 
mutation rates of viruses such as in HIV, combined 
with short generation times and large population 
sizes, allows viruses to evolve rapidly and adapt to 
the host. 
Nature of science: Falsification
Discovery of reverse transcriptase in viruses 
The central dogma of molecular biology proposes that genetic information flows unidirectionally 
from DNA to RNA to protein. However, in 1970 the enzyme reverse transcriptase was discovered in 
retroviruses by David Baltimore, thereby falsifying the first step of the central dogma. Its discovery 
laid the foundation for the discovery of the HIV virus in 1984 and led to the development of 
effective therapy for treating HIV infection. The transfer of genetic information from RNA to DNA 
has since been recognized as a general principle of evolution operating not just in viruses but 
throughout biology.
	ATL A2.3C 
Choose a virus (that causes a well-known infectious disease) to write about, such as rabies or 
Ebola. You could create a poster showing the structure of its capsid and genome, its life cycle in a 
named host cell, its evolutionary history, its effects on human physiology and current treatments.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
 
■Consequences of rapid viral evolution
The rapid evolution of viruses has consequences for treating the diseases caused by these pathogens. 
Yearly flu vaccines are developed to ensure their efficacy (the percentage reduction in a disease 
in a group of people who received a vaccination in a clinical trial). In the most recent COVID-19 
pandemic, many variants evolved, sometimes with different symptoms. The evolution of new 
variants leads to difficulties in treating the virus, with the vaccines first used in the pandemic 
becoming less efficacious as new variants emerged.
Top tip!
Emerging diseases, 
such as HIV and 
COVID-19, are often 
virulent as they are not 
adapted to their new 
host species.  
glycoprotein
lipid 
membrane
RNA
reverse 
transcriptase 
(enzyme)
protease 
(enzyme)
capsid 
(protein)
 
■Figure A2.3.12 The human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A2.3   Viruses
101
Tool 2: Technology
Using computer modelling
Compartmental models are a very general modelling 
technique often used in the mathematical modelling of 
infectious diseases, including COVID-19. The population 
is classified into compartments with labels, for example, 
S, I or R, (susceptible, infectious or recovered).
People in the population may move from S to I to R. 
Figure A2.3.13 below shows the SIR model for the 
transition between these states. The SIR model is 
accurate for describing infectious diseases that are only 
transmitted by human to human and where recovery 
gives long-lasting resistance.
Susceptible
Infectious
Recovered
     
 
■Figure A2.3.13 SIR model showing the transition 
between susceptible, infectious and recovered states
Models try to predict how a viral or bacterial disease 
spreads, the total number infected, or the time period 
of an epidemic, and estimate various epidemiological 
parameters, such as the reproductive number, R0, 
where R0 is the expected number of secondary cases 
produced by a single infection in a population that 
is completely susceptible. The models can show 
how different interventions, such as a lockdown or 
vaccination, may affect the outcome of an epidemic.
 
■Figure A2.3.14 SIR model showing numbers of 
susceptible, infectious or recovered in a population
Figure A2.3.14 shows an SIR model for an outbreak of 
an infectious disease. The y-axis is the number of 
people and the x-axis is the time in days. S stands for 
‘numbers of susceptible’, i.e. members of the 
population who can catch the infection; I for 
‘infectious’, or those in the population who have the 
infection and can spread it; and R for ‘recovered’, those 
who have had the disease but are now better. 
5	 Describe the 
graph model in 
Figure A2.3.14 and 
then deduce how 
S, I and R interact 
with each other.
	ATL A2.3D 
What factors determine the spread of a virus? Use the following site to explore various scenarios: 
www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/world/corona-simulator/
What lessons have you learned about the most effective strategies for limiting the spread of 
rapidly evolving viruses?
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What mechanisms contribute to convergent evolution?
2	 To what extent is the history of life characterized by increasing complexity or simplicity?
