Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
102
A3.1
Diversity of organisms
•	 What is a species?
•	 What patterns are seen in the diversity of genomes within and between species?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A3.1.1 	 Variation between organisms as a defining feature of life
	 A3.1.2 	 Species as groups of organisms with shared traits
	 A3.1.3 	 Binomial system for naming organisms
	 A3.1.4 	 Biological species concept
	 A3.1.5 	 Difficulties distinguishing between populations and species due to divergence 
of non-interbreeding populations during speciation
	 A3.1.6 	 Diversity in chromosome numbers of plant and animal species
	 A3.1.7 	 Karyotyping and karyograms
	 A3.1.8 	 Unity and diversity of genomes within species
	 A3.1.9 	 Diversity of eukaryote genomes
	 A3.1.10 	 Comparison of genome sizes
	 A3.1.11 	 Current and potential future uses of whole genome sequencing
	 A3.1.12 	 Difficulties applying the biological species concept to asexually reproducing 
species and to bacteria that have horizontal gene transfer (HL only)
	 A3.1.13 	 Chromosome number as a shared trait within a species (HL only)
	 A3.1.14 	 Engagement with local plant or animal species to develop a dichotomous key 
(HL only)
	 A3.1.15 	 Identification of species from environmental DNA in a habitat using barcodes 
(HL only)
Variation between organisms 
In 1831, scientist Charles Darwin was employed as a naturalist on the ship HMS Beagle. The journey 
lasted five years and provided the fieldwork for Darwin’s famous book On the Origin of Species by 
Means of Natural Selection, which was published in 1859. During his travels, and particularly during 
his visit to the Galápagos Islands, Charles Darwin 
noted that all species showed large variation: each 
individual was slightly different from others in the 
population (see Figure A3.1.1). This observation 
formed a central pillar of his theory of evolution by 
natural selection – an explanation of how all species on 
Earth arose. Darwin had also observed that humans 
can select for different breeds of animals (for example 
pigeons – see page 141), and that if this ‘artificial 
selection’ could lead to new varieties then there was no 
reason why, given enough time, nature could not select 
for new varieties and, ultimately, new species (hence 
‘natural selection’). 
 
■Figure A3.1.1 Variation in one species 
of beetle; the wing cases of fourteen-
spot ladybirds (Propylea 14-punctata) 
show variation in colouration patterns 
between these individuals, which were 
all collected from the same nettle plant
	
◆Species: a group of 
individuals of common 
ancestry that closely 
resemble each other and 
that are normally capable 
of interbreeding to 
produce fertile offspring.
	
◆Variation: differences 
between individuals of a 
species. May be caused 
by environmental and/or 
genetic factors.
Link
The theory of 
evolution by natural 
selection is explored 
more fully in Chapter 
D4.1, page 779.
Concept: 
Diversity
All species show 
variation. This is 
one of the pillars 
on which evolution 
by natural selection 
is based.
Theme A 
Unity and diversity – Organisms


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
103
 
■Continuous variation
As Darwin noted, all species show variation. Some of this variation can be at any value of 
measurement for a specific characteristic, such as height, and is called continuous variation. 
Many features of humans are controlled by polygenes (i.e. several different genes), including body 
weight and height. A graph of the height of a population of 400 people, Figure A3.1.2, shows 
continuous variation between the shortest person at 160 cm and the tallest person at 185 cm, with a 
mean height of 173 cm.
Human height is determined genetically
by interactions of the alleles of several
genes, probably located at loci on
different chromosomes.
Variation in the height of adult
humans
The results cluster around a mean value
and show a normal distribution. For the
purpose of the graph, the heights are
collected into arbitrary groups, each of
a height range of 2 cm.

160–1
height (in 2cm bands)
50
40
30
20
10
number of people
0
162–3
164–5
166–7
168–9
170–1
172–3
174–5
176–7
178–9
180–1
182–3
184–5
 
■Figure A3.1.2 Human height as a case of polygenic inheritance 
‘Normal distribution’ means that when the frequency of measurement classes is plotted against 
the measurement classes, a symmetrical bell-shaped curve is obtained, with values grouped 
symmetrically around a central value (Figure A3.1.2). 
Another factor that may affect the appearance of the phenotype (the physical appearance of an 
organism and its internal physiology) and produce variation between organisms is the effect 
of environmental conditions. This can affect the continuous variation of a species by altering 
the physiology of individuals. For example, a tall plant may appear almost dwarf if it has been 
consistently deprived of adequate essential mineral ions. Similarly, the physique of humans may be 
greatly affected by the levels of nourishment received, particularly as children. So, the phenotype of 
an organism is the product of both its genotype and the influences of the environment.
 
■Discontinuous variation
Some variation in species is not continuous but discrete, such as blood type, and so is known as 
discontinuous variation. Discontinuous variation is, therefore, variation that has distinct groups 
that organisms belong to. There is no intermediate form and no overlap between the two phenotypes. 
Characteristics that demonstrate discontinuous variation are controlled by a single gene, usually with 
two alleles (the human blood group system has three alleles – see Chapter D3.2, page 734). 
Discontinuous variation is not subject to environmental factors and is determined solely by the 
genotype (genetic composition) of the species.
In this way, species can show both continuous and discontinuous patterns of variation.
 
■Distinguishing between different species
Figure A3.1.1 shows that there is morphological variation within a species, where morphology 
refers to the ‘form and structure’ of an organism. The question then arises, how can one species 
be distinguished from another species that also shows significant variation? Some individuals 
of one species, within the variation shown, may resemble individuals of another species.  
	
◆Continuous 
variation: where there is 
a continuum of variation 
from one phenotype 
to another, e.g. human 
height.
	
◆Polygenic 
inheritance: 
inheritance of phenotypic 
characteristics (such as 
height in humans) that 
are determined by the 
collective effects of 
several different genes.
	
◆Discontinuous 
variation: arises 
when the characteristic 
concerned is one of two 
or more discrete types 
with no intermediate 
forms. Examples include 
the garden pea plant (tall 
or dwarf) and human 
ABO blood grouping 
(group A, B, AB or O).
	
◆Allele: an alternative 
form of a gene occupying 
a specific locus on a 
chromosome.
	
◆Homeotic mutation: 
alteration in genes that 
determine the type or 
location of a body part 
during an organism’s 
development.
	
◆Morphology: form 
and structure of an 
organism. 
Top tip!
Discontinuous 
variation can be due 
to threshold effects 
in development or 
mutations of large 
effect, including 
homeotic mutations 
that cause discrete 
changes in form from 
a single mutation 
(e.g., loss of one pair 
of wings in insects; 
conversion of petals to 
stamens in plants).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
104
Historically, taxonomists – scientists who define and classify groups of biological organisms based 
on shared characteristics – over many years have learnt to distinguish one species from another. 
Many species show sexual dimorphism, where males appear different from females (e.g. lions), 
which also leads to morphological variation within a species. By collecting and studying a large 
number of individuals within a species, taxonomists can distinguish one species from another 
irrespective of the complex variation shown. This is the basis for naming and classifying organisms.
Most natural history museums, where the process of classification and storage of the Earth’s 
biodiversity takes place, have molecular laboratories for the DNA profiling of species within their 
collection. This has allowed taxonomists to check on the current classification of species, make 
necessary changes, and to analyse new species to ensure they are placed correctly within the 
classification system (see page 135). DNA profiling (Chapter D1.1, page 608) allows for genetic 
variation within a species and ensures that clear parameters can be set when deciding whether an 
individual belongs to one species or another.
What is a species?
Species were originally defined by their appearance – the species concept – based on what they 
looked like (shape, colour and other distinctive features). This is known as the morphological 
species concept. This concept therefore defines a species in terms of its body shape and other 
structural features (or ‘traits’). Two organisms that had different morphologies were placed in 
different species. Species have been defined in this way since before modern science. This original 
concept of ‘species’ was used by Swedish scientist Carl Linnaeus (see more below) in the 1700s.
Although much criticised, the concept of morphological species is still a widely used species concept 
in everyday life, and still retains an important place within the biological sciences, particularly in the 
case of plants. 
Advantages: 
l	 can be applied to asexual and sexual organisms  
l	 does not require any information on the extent of gene flow 
l	 can be applied to extinct and fossilized species 
l	 easiest and fastest concept to apply in the field because it is based only on the appearance of 
the organism.
Limitations: 
l	 relies on subjective criteria and researchers may disagree on which structural features distinguish 
a species 
l	 different individuals in a species may appear very different, such as males and females.
The binomial system for naming organisms
Classification is essential to biology because there are too many different living organisms to sort and 
compare unless they are organized into manageable categories. There are currently approximately 
1.8 million described species, and so a process is needed to divide organisms into groups of similar 
species. Biological classification schemes are the invention of biologists and are based upon the best 
available evidence at the time. With an effective classification system in use, it is easier to organize 
our ideas about organisms and make generalizations.
The science of classification is called taxonomy. The word comes from taxa (singular, taxon), which 
is the general name for groups or categories within a classification system.
Link
For more on 
classifying organisms 
see Chapter A3.2, 
page 125.
1	 Distinguish 
between 
continuous and 
discontinuous 
variation.
	
◆Sexual dimorphism: 
differences in appearance 
between males and 
females of the same 
species, such as in colour, 
shape, size and structure. 
	
◆Species concept: 
a working definition 
of a species and a 
methodology for 
determining whether two 
organisms are members 
of the same species.
	
◆Morphological 
species concept: 
species are groups of 
organisms with shared 
traits.
	
◆Taxonomy: the 
science of classification.
	
◆Taxon: a classificatory 
grouping.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
105
The scheme of classification must be flexible, allowing newly discovered living organisms to be 
added where they fit best. It should also include fossils since we believe living and extinct species 
are related.
The process of classification involves:
l	 giving every organism an agreed name
l	 imposing a scheme upon the diversity of living things.
Carl Linnaeus (Figure A3.1.3) was a Swedish botanist, physician and zoologist, who in the 1730s 
developed the method of classifying organisms that is still used today: binomial nomenclature or the 
binomial system (meaning ‘two-part name’). Linnaeus is known as the father of modern taxonomy 
and is also considered one of the fathers of modern ecology. Linnaeus published Systema Naturae 
(The Natural World) in 1734 (Figure A3.1.4), in which he divided flowering plants into classes 
determined by the structure of their sexual organs. In 1749 he introduced the binomial 
nomenclature for which he is now famous. Each plant was given a Latin noun (the genus) followed 
by an adjective (the species). The generic name comes first and begins with a capital letter, followed 
by the species name. Traditionally, a species name is written in italics (or is underlined). Humans, for 
example, have the species name Homo sapiens, where ‘Homo’ is the genus and ‘sapiens’ is the species. 
There can be several different species in a genus – we share the Homo genus with several other (now 
extinct) species, such as the Neanderthals (Homo neanderthalensis) – see Figure A3.1.5. 
Species in the same genus share similar traits. For example, the skulls from genus Homo shown in 
Figure A3.1.5 have a larger brain capacity and smaller face compared to other species of the family 
Hominidae (the great apes). The similar traits relate to similar life histories and adaptations to the 
environment (Chapter B4.2).
	Homo neanderthalensis	
Homo antecessor	
Homo sapiens	
Homo erectus
 
■Figure A3.1.5 Skulls of species in the genus Homo 
As shown in Figure A3.1.6, closely related organisms have the same generic name; only their species 
names differ. You will see that, when organisms are referred to frequently, the full name is given 
the first time, but after the generic name is shortened to the first (capital) letter. Thus, in continuing 
references to humans in an article or scientific paper, Homo sapiens would become H. sapiens. 
Top tip!
When writing species names, the convention is to start the genus with a capital letter and the 
species with a lower-case letter. The species name should be either written in italics or underlined.
	
◆Binomial system: 
double names for 
organisms, in Latin, 
with the generic 
name preceding the 
specific name.
	
◆Genus: a group of 
similar and closely related 
species.
 
■Figure A3.1.3 
Carl Linnaeus
 
■Figure A3.1.4 
Carl Linnaeus’ most 
famous work; Systema 
Naturae showed for 
the first time how life 
could be classified


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
106
Panthera leo (lion)
Panthera tigris (tiger)
 
■Figure A3.1.6 Naming organisms by the binomial system     
Common mistake
Students often begin the genus name with a lower-case letter, for example homo sapiens. This is 
incorrect. The genus should start with a capital, e.g. Homo, and the full species name should be 
underlined when written by hand, e.g. Homo sapiens.
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour
Why is a standardized, universal method for naming species needed? 
Many organisms have local common names, but these often differ around the world. They do not 
allow observers to be confident that they are all talking about the same organism. For example, 
the name ‘magpie’ represents entirely different birds commonly seen in Europe, in Asia and in Sri 
Lanka (Figure A3.1.7). Instead, scientists use the international binomial system, so that everyone 
everywhere knows exactly which organism is being referred to. International cooperation and 
collaboration continue to develop and apply a common set of species names for use throughout the 
world. This agreed convention and the common terminology for species names used globally helps 
prevent ambiguous communication.
European magpie  
(Pica pica)
Sri Lankan magpie 
(Urocissa ornata)
Asian magpie  
(Platysmurus leucopterus)
 
■Figure A3.1.7 ‘Magpie’ species of the world
The biological species concept
The most widely used definition of species in modern science was developed by zoologist Ernst Mayr 
in 1942. According to his biological species concept, a species is a group of organisms that can 
breed and produce fertile offspring.
2	 Outline the 
process by which 
species are named.
Concept: Unity
The binomial 
system provides a 
universal means 
of classifying 
organisms that 
can be understood 
worldwide.
3	 Scientific names 
of organisms are 
often difficult 
to pronounce or 
remember. State 
why they are used.
	
◆Biological species 
concept: a species is a 
group of organisms that 
can breed and produce 
fertile offspring.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
107
There are limitations to the biological species concept:
l	 It does not apply to organisms that reproduce asexually all or most of the time, e.g. prokaryotes.
l	 It does not apply to organisms that are extinct. 
l	 It overemphasizes gene flow and downplays the role of natural selection, as natural selection can 
cause many pairs of species that are morphologically and ecologically distinct to remain distinct 
and yet have gene flow between them.
 
■Alternative species concepts
An alternative to the original morphological species concept is the ecological species concept. 
Ecology is the study of organisms in relation to their environment, and so this concept uses 
ecological factors to define species. Each species has a particular role in the environment, known as 
its ‘niche’. The niche of a species is everything about where and how it lives – what it eats, how it 
reproduces, its habitat, and so on. Each species has therefore, by definition, a unique niche. 
The ecological species concept defines a species in terms of its ecological niche, i.e. the sum of how 
members of the species interact with the non-living (abiotic) and living (biotic) aspects of their 
environment. For example, two species of finches on the Galápagos Islands may be similar in 
appearance but distinguishable based on what they feed on.  
Advantages of the ecological species concept: 
l	 It can accommodate asexual as well as sexual species.  
l	 It emphasizes the role of disruptive natural selection as organisms adapt to different 
environmental conditions.  
Limitations of the ecological species concept:
l	 Niches are generally difficult to identify because a niche involves the interaction between the 
organism and its environment (both biotic and abiotic).
Today, genetic techniques allow scientists to compare genetic sequences from different organisms 
to compare similarities and potential ancestry. These techniques have allowed the evolutionary 
species concept to be developed, which gives scientists a detailed overview not only of what defines 
a species, but also the interrelationship between species over geological time. 
Table A3.1.1 compares the four different species concepts.
 
■Table A3.1.1 Comparing different species concepts
Species concept
Approach and methodology
Morphological species 
concept
relies on morphological data and emphasizes groups of physical traits that are 
unique to each species
Biological species concept
relies on behavioural information and emphasizes reproductive isolation 
between groups
Ecological species concept
relies on detailed information about how organisms interact with their biotic 
(biological) and abiotic (non-living) environment
Evolutionary species concept
relies on genetic data and emphasizes distinct evolutionary links between groups
Difficulties distinguishing between 
a population and a species
In nature, organisms are members of local populations. A population is a group of individuals of 
the same species, living close enough to be able to interbreed (see more in Chapter C4.1, page 548). 
Species typically exist in localized populations, although the boundaries of a local population can be 
hard to define.
	
◆Ecological species 
concept: a species is a 
group of organisms that 
is adapted to a particular 
set of resources (niche); 
this concept explains 
differences in form and 
behaviour between 
species as adaptations to 
resource availability.
	
◆Evolutionary 
species concept: 
a species is a single 
lineage of populations 
descending from a 
common ancestor, which 
maintains its identity 
from other such lineages 
and which has its own 
selection pressures and 
evolutionary outcome.
	
◆Population: 
interacting groups of 
organisms of the same 
species living in an area.
4	 Distinguish 
between the 
biological and 
evolutionary 
species concepts.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
108
Look at Figure A3.1.8 below.
You can see that a population of garden snails might occupy a small part of a garden, perhaps 
around a compost heap. A population of thrushes (snail-eating birds) might occupy some gardens 
and surrounding fields. So, the area occupied by a population depends on the size of the organism 
and on how mobile it is, for example, as well as on environmental factors (such as food supply 
and predation).
The boundaries of a population may be hard to define. Some populations are completely ‘open’, with 
individuals moving in from, or out to, other nearby populations. Alternatively, some populations are 
‘closed’; they are isolated populations almost completely cut off from neighbours of the same species. 
The snails in the traffic island flower bed (Figure A3.1.8) are a good example of a closed population.
hedge (home to
predators of
garden snail)
‘open’ population of snails,
around compost heap
limited
snail migrations
‘open’ population of
snails in flower bed
‘semi-open’ population
of snails in vegetable patch
‘closed’ population of
snails on traffic island
flower bed
roadways
(barrier to effective migrations
of snails in most cases)
snail migration
 
■Figure A3.1.8 The concept of population
Individuals in local populations tend to resemble each other. They may become quite different from 
members of other populations. Local populations are very important because they are a potential 
starting point for speciation. Speciation is the name we give to the process by which one species 
splits into two or more species. Present-day flora and fauna have arisen by change from pre-existing 
forms of life. The term ‘speciation’ emphasizes the fact that species change. The fossil record 
provides evidence for this process (see page 161).
Development of barriers within local populations is a possible cause. Before separation, individuals 
share a common gene pool (See Chapter D4.1, page 790) but, after isolation, processes such as 
mutation can cause change in one population but not in the other. Alternatively, a new population 
may form from a tiny sample that became separated from a much larger population. While the 
number of individuals in the new population may rapidly increase, the gene pool from which they 
formed may have been totally unrepresentative of the original, with many alleles lost altogether. 
In this way, populations of the same species can change, through accumulation of gradual changes 
in the genotype through time, to eventually form new, genetically distinct species.
Link
The topic of 
speciation by splitting 
of pre-existing species 
is explored further 
in Chapter A4.1, 
page 147.
Gene pools are 
discussed in Chapter 
D4.1, page 790.
	
◆Speciation: the 
process by which new 
species form, where one 
species is split into two or 
more species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
109
Going further
The founder effect and genetic drift
The founder effect occurs when a few individuals become geographically isolated 
from a larger population, and this smaller group may establish a new population whose 
gene pool differs from the source population. The isolation mechanism indiscriminately 
chooses some individuals, but not others, from the source population.  
Genetic drift describes the random fluctuations in the numbers of alleles in a 
population. Genetic drift takes place when the occurrence of alleles increases or 
decreases by chance over time. These variations in the presence of alleles are measured 
as changes in allele frequencies.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing 
Exploring
Think about the definitions of ‘species’ and ‘population’, and the way in which separate 
populations of one species can evolve into distinct species. Is there a problem here?
Isolated populations will show variation both within and between populations. At what 
point do variations between isolated populations show sufficient difference to allow 
separate groups to be called new species?
Research problems regarding species concepts. Are there ways of deciding when 
speciation has occurred? Make sure you consult a variety of relevant sources 
of information.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Speciation usually happens gradually rather than by a single act, with populations becoming more 
and more different in their traits. It can therefore be an arbitrary decision whether two populations 
are regarded as the same or different species. A further difficulty arises because of the definition 
of ‘species’. According to the biological species concept, a species is a group of organisms that can 
breed and produce fertile offspring. If populations have diverged and can no longer interbreed 
(i.e. the individuals of one population do not reproduce with those of another), how can it be 
determined that the isolated populations have evolved sufficiently to form new species? It is possible 
that separate populations can still, in theory, interbreed, and are still therefore members of the same 
species, but this cannot be proven since they are isolated from one another and so cannot physically 
meet up and interbreed. 
Common mistake
The smallest unit of evolution is a population. One common misconception about evolution is that 
individual organisms evolve during their lifetimes. Natural selection (Chapters A4.1 and D4.1) acts on 
individuals, but it is populations that evolve. Individual organisms cannot evolve. But a population 
can have genetic variation in traits and can undergo Darwinian evolution, resulting in all the 
changes in genotypes and phenotypes associated with evolutionary change. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
110
The diversity in chromosome numbers 
of plant and animal species
Concept: Diversity
Chromosomes vary in number and shape among 
organisms. Bacteria have circular chromosomes whereas 
animals and plants have linear chromosomes. Variety 
in chromosome number can be related to evolutionary 
origin and functional differences between organisms. 
Concept: Unity
The number of chromosomes in the cells of 
different species varies, but in any one species 
the number of chromosomes per cell is normally 
constant (Table A3.1.2). A fruit fly, for example, has 
8 chromosomes, while a rice plant has 24. 
The variety, or diversity, of organisms is demonstrated by the varying number of chromosomes seen 
in animal and plant species (Table A3.1.2). There are five features of the chromosomes of eukaryotic 
organisms that are helpful to remember.
 
■1 The number of chromosomes per species is fixed
The number of chromosomes in the cells of different species varies, but in any one species the 
number of chromosomes per cell is normally constant (Table A3.1.2). For example, the mouse has 
40 chromosomes per cell, the onion has 16, humans have 46 and the sunflower has 34. Each 
species has a characteristic chromosome number. Note, these are all even numbers.
 
■Table A3.1.2 Diploid chromosome numbers compared
Species
Number of 
chromosomes 
per cell
Species
Number of 
chromosomes 
per cell
Parascaris equorum (roundworm)
2
Mus musculus (mouse)
40
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)
8
Homo sapiens (human)
46
Oryza sativa (rice)
24
Pan troglodytes (chimpanzee)
48
Helianthus annuus (sunflower)
34
Canis familiaris (dog)
78
 
■2 The shape of a chromosome is characteristic
Chromosomes are long, thin structures of a fixed length. Somewhere along the length of the 
chromosome is a narrow region called the centromere. Centromeres may occur anywhere along 
the chromosome, but they are always in the same position on any given chromosome. The position 
of the centromere and the length of chromosome (as well as the banding patterns after staining) on 
each side enable scientists to identify particular chromosomes in photomicrographs.
 
■3 The chromosomes of a cell occur in pairs called 
homologous pairs
We have seen that the chromosomes of a cell occur in pairs, called homologous pairs 
(Figure A1.2.9). One of each pair came originally from the male parent and one from the female 
parent. Cells in which the chromosomes are in homologous pairs are described as having a diploid 
nucleus. We describe this as 2n where the symbol ‘n’ represents one set of chromosomes. A cell that 
has one chromosome of each pair has a haploid nucleus. We represent this as n. A sex cell has a 
haploid nucleus – formed as a result of the nuclear division known as meiosis (page 271).
Top tip!
You need to know, as 
an example of diversity 
in chromosome 
numbers, that humans 
have 46 chromosomes 
and chimpanzees 
have 48.
	
◆Centromere: 
constriction of the 
chromosome, the region 
that becomes attached to 
the spindle fibres during 
nuclear division.
	
◆Diploid: cells having 
two sets of chromosomes 
(one from each parent 
organism).
	
◆Haploid: cells 
having one of set of 
chromosomes.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
111
 
■4 Genes occur at specific loci
We have seen that chromosomes carry genes in a linear sequence. The position of a gene is called a 
locus (plural, loci), and each gene has two or more forms, called alleles (Figure A1.2.9). The two 
alleles may carry exactly the same ‘message’ – the same sequence of bases coding for an identical 
protein. A diploid organism that has the same allele of a gene at the gene’s locus on both copies of 
the homologous chromosomes in its cells is described as homozygous. 
Alternatively, the two alleles may be different. A diploid organism that has different alleles of a gene at 
the gene’s locus on both copies of the homologous pair is heterozygous.
 
■5 Chromosomes are copied precisely
Between nuclear divisions, while the chromosomes are uncoiled (in the form of chromatin) and 
cannot be seen, each chromosome is copied. It is said to replicate. 
Replication occurs in the cell cycle, during interphase (page 651). The two identical structures 
formed are called chromatids (Figure A3.1.9). The chromatids remain attached by their centromeres 
until they are separated during nuclear division. After division of the centromeres, the chromatids 
are recognized as chromosomes again.
Of course, when chromosomes are copied, the critical event is the copying of the DNA double helix 
that runs the length of the chromosome. Replication occurs in a very precise way, brought about by 
specific enzymes, as will be discussed in Chapter D1.1 (page 602).
the centromere, a small constriction on
the chromatids, is not a gene and does
not code for a protein, as genes do
each chromatid is a copy of the other,
with its linear series of genes (individual
genes are too small to be seen)
centromere divides
chromatids separate during
nuclear division
sister chromatids attached at 
the centromere, making up one
chromosome
 
■Figure A3.1.9 One chromosome as two chromatids
Karyotyping and karyograms
The number and type of chromosomes in the nucleus is known as the karyotype. In Figure A3.1.10 
on the left-hand side, the karyotype of a diploid human male cell is shown, much enlarged.
These chromosomes are seen at an early stage of the nuclear division called mitosis (page 653). 
You can see that at this stage each chromosome is present as two chromatids, held together by 
its centromere.
	
◆Homozygous: having 
two identical alleles of 
a gene.
	
◆Heterozygous: 
having two different 
alleles of a gene.
5	 Define the terms:
a	 gene 
b	 allele. 
6	 Explain how 
genes and alleles 
differ.
	
◆Karyotype: the 
number and type of 
chromosomes present in 
an organism.
Link
The terms ‘locus’ 
and ‘allele’ were 
introduced in Chapter 
A1.2, page 21.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
112
human chromosomes of a male (karyotype)
(seen at the equator of the spindle during
nuclear division)
chromosomes arranged as homologous
pairs in descending order of size
images of chromosomes
cut from a copy of this
photomicrograph can be
arranged and pasted to
produce a karyogram
each chromosome has been replicated
(copied) and exists as two chromatids
held together at their centromeres
homologous
chromosomes
{
For the image on the right in Figure A3.1.10, the individual chromosomes were cut 
out from a copy of the original photograph. These were then arranged in homologous 
pairs in descending order of size, and numbered. A photograph of this type is called 
a karyogram.
A karyotype, as well as being the number and appearance of chromosomes, also includes 
their length, banding pattern and centromere position. These differences can be seen in a 
karyotype stained to show banding patterns (Figure A3.1.11). This is the easiest way to 
tell two different chromosomes apart. Banding patterns are shown when chromosomes 
are stained with Giemsa dye, or fluorochromes when chromosomes are to be studied 
with a fluorescent microscope (page 62). The light and dark bands describe the position 
of genes on the chromosome – the size and location of bands on chromosomes make 
each chromosome pair unique. Centromeres are regions in chromosomes that appear as a 
constriction (Chapter D2.1) and play a role in the separation of chromosomes into daughter 
cells during cell division (mitosis and meiosis). Again, the position of the centromere varies 
(Figure A3.1.11) and can be used to distinguish different chromosomes.
 
■Sex chromosomes
In Figure A3.1.10 you can see that two chromosomes are not numbered on the karyogram. Rather, 
they are labelled X (next to 6) and Y (next to 22). These are known as the sex chromosomes; they 
decide the sex of the individual – a male in this case. They are often shown as the final pair of 
chromosomes in the karyogram. All the other chromosomes (pairs numbered 1 to 22) are called 
autosomes. Karyograms are used by genetic counsellors to detect the presence of (rare) 
chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down syndrome.
 
■Figure A3.1.10 Chromosomes as homologous pairs, seen during nuclear division
1 size
2 banding
   pattern
3 centromere
   position
1 size
 
■Figure A3.1.11 Three features can 
be used to identify chromosomes
Link
For more on mitosis 
and cell division 
see Chapter D2.1, 
page 653.
	
◆Karyogram: a diagram 
or photograph showing 
the chromosomes of a cell, 
arranged in homologous 
pairs in descending order 
of size.
	
◆Sex chromosome: 
a chromosome which 
determines sex rather 
than other body (somatic) 
characteristics.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
113
 
■Investigating the differences in human and chimpanzee 
chromosome numbers
Humans (Homo sapiens) have 23 pairs of chromosomes. However, every other living species in 
the family Hominidae, including our closest relatives the bonobo (Pan paniscus) and chimpanzee 
(Pan troglodytes), have 24 chromosome pairs. DNA sequencing has shown that less than 3% 
of human DNA is different from the chimpanzee. What might have happened to change the 
number of chromosomes in humans? Have a look at 
Figure A3.1.12, which compares the karyograms of 
chimpanzees and humans. What do you notice?
An alignment of the human and chimpanzee 
chromosomes shows that the centromere of human 
chromosome 2 lines up almost exactly with that of 
chimpanzee chromosome 2A. The hypothesis has 
been suggested that two of the ape chromosomes must 
have fused to form one large one. Let’s evaluate the 
evidence in the Inquiry.
7	 Outline the evidence that chromosome 
2 in humans arose from the fusion of 
chromosomes in a shared ancestor.
 
■Figure A3.1.12 A comparison of human 
and chimpanzee chromosomes
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
1	 Scientists compared human and chimpanzee 
chromosomes and found remarkable similarity in 
banding between human chromosome 2 and chimp 
chromosomes that were originally numbered 12 and 13. 
2	 Human chromosome 2 has two sets of centromeres: 
usually a chromosome has just one centromere, but 
in the human chromosome 2 there are remnants of a 
second centromere (Figure A3.1.13). 
3	 There is a segment of the long arm of human 
chromosome 2, close to its centromere, that has 
significant similarity to chimpanzee telomeric DNA (see 
Figure A3.1.13). The detailed sequence in this region 
is exactly what you would expect to see if the two 
chimpanzee chromosomes had fused end-to-end. 
The evidence supports the hypothesis of an ancestral 
fusion event between the chromosomes originally 
numbered 12 and 13 in chimpanzees. This ‘new’ human 
chromosome is, in fact, the second largest chromosome 
as viewed under a microscope, and it is therefore named 
chromosome 2. The chimpanzee chromosomes involved 
in the fusion (12 and 13) have been renamed as 2A and 
2B in recognition of this fusion event (Figure A3.1.13).  
The exact mechanism through which these two 
chimpanzee chromosomes fused is not yet completely 
understood, although studies show that no genes from 
the ends of chimpanzee chromosomes 2A and 2B appear 
to have been lost. 
human
chromosome 2
chimpanzee
chromosomes 2A and 2B
centromere
(middle)
 
■Figure A3.1.13 Evolution of human chromosome 2
Link
Chromosomal 
abnormalities are 
discussed further 
in Chapter D2.1, 
page 658.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
X
Y
human chromosomes
chimpanzee chromosomes
2A 2B


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
114
Tool 2: Technology 
Identifying and extracting data from databases
Genes are located at a specific position on a chromosome (its locus – see Chapter A1.2, 
page 21). Online databases can be used to locate the locus of specific genes in the 
human genome. The database also provides information about the function of the 
gene (e.g. its polypeptide product).
Procedure
1	 Access the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man website: http://omim.org 
2	 Go to the Gene Map search engine: www.omim.org/search/advanced/entry  
3	 Enter the name of a gene into the search engine (access a list of genes here:  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_human_genes). A box will appear with information 
about the gene, including the chromosome it is found on (‘Location’, the number 
before the colon), its locus and details of its function.
4	 Alternatively, you can enter the number or name of a chromosome – autosomal (1–22) 
or the sex chromosomes (X or Y) – and a complete sequence of gene loci for the 
chromosome will be displayed.
In small groups, prepare a poster or presentation about one gene. Include the following 
information:
l	 Which chromosome is it found on?
l	 What is its exact locus?
l	 What is the role of the gene in the body?
l	 How did you locate the gene and information about it?
Nature of science: Hypotheses
Distinguishing between testable hypotheses 
and non-testable statements
A good scientific hypothesis has the following qualities:
l	 It is testable via experiments and verifiable through 
observations.
l	 It is predictive and predicts a specific outcome under 
particular conditions.
l	 It is explanatory.
There are limits to what the natural sciences can investigate. 
Science explores natural or physical phenomena but cannot 
investigate paranormal and supernatural events. These 
limitations are largely due to falsifiability, which means that 
hypotheses should be testable via observations or experiments. 
If an idea is falsifiable and can potentially be disproved, then it 
is scientific and may be evaluated by the scientific method.  
Many areas of human knowledge are ‘non-scientific’ when 
viewed through this perspective. Science also cannot 
investigate questions in ethics, morality, aesthetics (principles 
concerning the nature and appreciation of beauty), philosophy 
and metaphysics (which concerns existence and the nature of 
entities that exist). 
Falsifiability provides a characteristic of scientific knowledge, 
but in some areas of scientific research falsifiability is not 
always possible. Some of the scientific ideas that are being 
developed are so complex or so new that it is not possible to 
falsify them using experiments and observations. Disciplines 
such as evolutionary biology, geology and astronomy contain 
ideas that are scientific but not falsifiable.
The origin of chromosome 2 is a testable hypothesis because 
observations made of the chromosomes in our nearest relative 
agree with genomic analysis which suggests a common 
ancestor between humans and chimpanzees some 4 million 
years ago. A variety of scientific evidence can therefore be 
used to develop a credible explanation for the origin of 
chromosome 2 in Homo sapiens.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
115
Unity and diversity of genomes within species
The genome is all the genetic information of an organism (see also Chapter A1.2, page 24). 
Organisms in the same species share most of their genome but variations occur, which give some 
diversity. The most common form of genetic variation among humans is called single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP). 
 
■Single-nucleotide polymorphisms
An SNP represents a difference in a single nucleotide. For example, an SNP may replace the 
nucleotide guanine (G) with the nucleotide adenine (A). SNPs occur throughout the genome and 
occur, on average, approximately once in every 1000 nucleotides in humans, which means there may 
be between 4 and 5 million SNPs in the genome of one person.
SNPs may be unique or occur in many individuals, and scientists have found more than 100 million 
SNPs in populations around the world. These variations are usually found in the non-coding parts of 
DNA found between genes. In this way, SNPs contribute to human diversity.
SNPs can act as biological markers, helping scientists locate genes that are associated with disease. 
When SNPs occur within a gene or in a regulatory region near a gene, they may play a more direct 
role in disease by affecting the gene’s function.
Scientists have shown that certain SNPs may help to predict an individual’s response to specific 
drugs and risk of developing particular diseases. SNPs can also be used to trace the inheritance of 
genetic diseases within families. 
The diversity of eukaryote genomes
Genomes vary in overall size, which is determined by the total amount of DNA. Genomes also vary 
in base sequence. Variation between species is much larger than variation within a species.
	ATL A3.1A 
Nucleotide sequences of specific genes can be compared 
from different species. The genomes from different 
species can be identified and then compared using two 
online resources:
l	 GenBank – a genetic database of DNA sequences. It can be 
used to identify the DNA sequence for a gene in a number 
of different species: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank
l	 Clustal Omega – a programme that compares DNA 
sequences: www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo
Complete the following steps:
1	 Access GenBank. Change the search parameter from 
‘nucleotide’ to ‘gene’.
2	 Type in the name of the gene of interest, for example 
‘cytochrome oxidase 1’ or ‘haemoglobin beta’.
3	 Choose the species of interest (right side of screen – Results 
by taxon) and click on the link (under ‘Name / Gene ID’).
4	 Scroll to the ‘Genomic regions, transcripts and products’ 
section and click on the ‘FASTA’ link.
5	 Access Clustal Omega. Change the input sequence type 
to ‘DNA’ and paste the relevant FASTA sequences (from 
GenBank) into the space provided (Step 1). Alternatively, 
sequences can be saved as a document in plain text format 
(.txt) and then uploaded.
6	 Before the sequence, designate a species name preceded 
by a forward arrow, e.g. ‘>Mouse’ or ‘>Human’.
7	 Repeat with a second sequence from GenBank. Paste the 
sequence into the same ‘Step 1’ box, underneath the first 
sequence. Do not forget to name the sequence.
8	 When all sequences have been included, click ‘submit’ 
under ‘Step 3 – submit your job’.
9	 The programme will compare the genome of the two 
species selected, showing similarities and differences 
between DNA sequences.
When you compare nucleotide sequences of two species 
think about:
l	 To what extent are the base sequences similar? 
l	 What do the differences tell you about the two species and 
their evolution?
Concept: Unity
Organisms in the 
same species 
share most of 
their genome.
	
◆Genome: the whole 
of the genetic information 
of an organism or cell.
	
◆Single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP): 
polymorphism involving 
variation of a single 
base pair.
Concept: 
Diversity
Variations such as 
single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms give 
some diversity in 
species’ genomes.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
116
Comparing genome sizes
Not all DNA codes for proteins. Genome size refers to the amount of DNA in a set of chromosomes 
in a species, measured in millions of base pairs (bp). 
Genome size varies between organisms (see Chapter A1.2, Table A1.2.2, page 24). However, larger 
genomes do not necessary confer greater complexity. Some organisms, in particular plants, form new 
species by combining whole sets of chromosomes (a process called polyploidy – see Chapter A4.1,  
page 154). This results in extremely large genome sizes, which have nothing to do with the 
complexity of the organism.
Common mistake
DNA in chromosomes and in mitochondria are considered part of the genome, as well as 
chloroplast DNA in plants, but not mRNA or tRNA.
Tool 2: Technology 
Identifying and extracting data from databases
You should be able to extract information about 
genome size for different taxonomic groups from 
a database to compare genome size to organism 
complexity. Various databases exist to compare 
genome sizes of different organisms: 
l	 Animal Genome Size Database:  
www.genomesize.com/index.php
Search for the genome size of species using common 
or scientific names. Data give chromosome number 
and genome size, measured by ‘C-value’. The C-value 
is the mass of DNA in picograms (1 pg ≈ 1 billion 
base pairs or 1000 Mb of DNA) in a haploid set of 
chromosomes (often measured from gametes).
l	 The genomes of plants can be researched using: 
https://cvalues.science.kew.org
l	 Ensembl: www.ensembl.org/info/about/species.html  
Select an organism from the drop-down list then 
click on ‘View karyotype’ (Figure A3.1.14) to see 
image of all chromosomes and genome size.
Comparing genome size with organism 
complexity 
1	 Select two organisms and find their genome size. 
2	 Find out about, or use your knowledge of, the size 
and complexity of these organisms, and relate this to 
the size of their genome. 
3	 Is there a correlation? 
 
■Figure A3.1.14 Accessing genome size and other data using Ensembl 
‘view karyotype’
Common 
mistake
Genome or genome 
size refers to the 
total amount of DNA 
measured in base 
pairs, not the number 
of genes.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
117
Current and potential future uses 
of whole genome sequencing
 
■The Human Genome Project
The Human Genome Project (HGP), an initiative to map the entire human genome, was a publicly 
funded project that was launched in 1990. The ultimate objective of the HGP was to discover the 
base sequence of the entire human genome. The work was shared among more than 200 laboratories 
around the world, avoiding duplication of effort. On 26 June 2000, an announcement established 
that the sequencing of the human genome had been achieved. 
At the same time as the HGP was underway, teams of scientists set about the sequencing of the DNA 
of other organisms. Initially, this included the common human gut bacterium (E. coli), the fruit fly, 
the mouse, bakers’ yeast and Arabidopsis (a weed related to important crops such as broccoli and 
oilseed rape). Since then, scientists have sequenced the genomes of about 3500 species of complex 
life with around 100 being sequenced at ‘reference quality’, which is used for in-depth research.
Developments in technology have meant that the speed of 
genome sequencing has increased while the cost has decreased. 
Ultimately, most, if not all, aspects of biological investigation 
will benefit from the results of the HGP. 
1 How many individual genes do we have and 
how do they work?
Genes may be located in base-sequence data by the detection 
of sequences that are uninterrupted by ‘start’ and ‘stop’ 
codons. Such regions are more likely to code for a protein. The 
3 × 109 bases that make up the human genome represent 
about 20 000 genes, far fewer than was expected. Drosophila 
(the fruit fly) has almost half our number of genes, and a rice 
plant has more than 40 000 genes.
Promoters and enhancers are associated with many genes and 
may determine which cells express which genes, when they are 
expressed and at what level. 
The genetic code of DNA is not altered by the environment (except in cases of mutation) – 
information flows out of genes and not back into them. However, while our genes are largely immune 
to direct outside influence, our experience may regulate the expression of particular genes. For 
example, genes are switched on and off by promoters, and this may occur in response to external 
factors. If so, our genes may be responding to our actions, as well as causing them (see Epigenesis on 
page 127).
2 Locating the cause of genetic disorders
Another outcome of the HGP is the ability to locate genes that are responsible for human genetic 
disorders. More than half of all genetic disorders are due to a mutation of a single gene that is 
commonly recessive. To prove a gene is associated with a disease, it must be shown that patients 
have a mutation in that gene, but that unaffected individuals do not. The outcome of the mutation 
in people is the loss of the ability to form the normal product of the gene. Common genetic diseases 
include cystic fibrosis (page 751), sickle-cell disease (page 623) and haemophilia (page 739).
 
■Figure A3.1.15 Here the order of the nucleotide bases is being 
determined in a molecule of DNA by a largely automated process


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
118
3 Development of the new discipline of bioinformatics
The genomes of many prokaryotes and eukaryotes have been sequenced already, as well as that of 
humans. This huge volume of data requires organization, storage and indexing to make practical use 
of the subsequent analyses. These tasks involve applied mathematics, informatics, statistics and 
computer science.
 
■Whole genome sequencing: current and potential future uses
Currently, genome sequencing is used to research evolutionary relationships (page 115). In the 
future, with advancing technology, potential applications could include more widespread use of 
personalized medicine, where an individual’s genetic profile is used to guide decisions regarding the 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of disease.
Malaria, the most significant insect-borne disease, poses a threat to 40% of the world’s population. 
Most malaria cases are found in Africa, south of the Sahara, and it is here that 90% of the fatalities 
due to this disease occur. Malaria is caused by Plasmodium, a protist, which is transmitted from one 
infected person to another by bloodsucking mosquitoes of the genus Anopheles. Of the four species of 
Plasmodium, only one (P. falciparum) causes severe illness. Vaccine research began in the 1980s but was 
at first unsuccessful. Now the situation is more hopeful. For example, the entire genome sequence of 
P. falciparum has been analysed. It consists of 14 chromosomes encoding approximately 5300 genes. 
This development is a major boost to the attempts to design a successful vaccine. The sequencing of the 
genome of P. falciparum could help lead to the development of vaccines by identifying potential antigens 
to which antibodies can bind. However, the complex parasitic lifestyle of Plasmodium makes it difficult 
to eradicate. Plasmodium has quickly developed drug resistance against each currently effective drug. 
The development of an effective malaria vaccine remains a major international challenge.
The difficulties applying the 
biological species concept to asexually 
reproducing species and bacteria
The biological species concept, discussed on page 106, does not work well for groups of organisms 
that do not reproduce sexually or where genes can be transferred from one species to another, for 
example in prokaryotes.
 
■Genetic transfer in prokaryotes
Even though bacteria reproduce asexually via binary fission, their populations show great genetic 
diversity. Within a given bacterial species, the term strain refers to a lineage that has genetic 
differences compared to another strain. For example, one strain of E. coli may be resistant to an 
antibiotic while another strain may be sensitive to the same antibiotic. 
The genetic diversity in bacteria comes primarily from two sources. The first way is through 
mutation. A mutation can occur that alters the DNA sequence of the bacterial genome and affects 
the traits of bacterial cells. For example, a mutation may give rise to a bacterial strain that requires 
a specific amino acid from an outside source for growth, while other strains of the same species can 
make this amino acid. 
The second way that genetic diversity can be generated is by genetic transfer/horizontal gene transfer, 
in which genetic material is transferred from one bacterial cell to another. Genetic transfer can occur 
in three very different ways: transformation, transduction and conjugation.
Top tip!
Bioinformatics is the 
storage, manipulation 
and analysis of 
biological information 
via computer science. 
At the centre of 
this development 
are the creation 
and maintenance of 
databases concerning 
nucleic acid sequences 
and the proteins 
derived from them. 
	
◆Binary fission: when 
a cell divides into two 
daughter cells, typically in 
asexual reproduction of 
prokaryotes.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A3.1   Diversity of organisms
119
Transformation
Transformation is the alteration of a bacterial cell’s genotype by the uptake of naked, foreign 
DNA from the surrounding environment (Figure A3.1.16). Usually, this DNA is released into the 
environment when another bacterium has lysed (broken down). Many bacteria possess cell-surface 
proteins that recognize and transport DNA from closely related species into the cell. This foreign 
DNA can then be incorporated into the genome, either by insertion or recombination via crossing 
over at homologous regions. 
Transformation with DNA fragments
DNA fragments
bacterial
chromosome
uptake of DNA
integration by
recombination
stable transformation
bacterial
chromosome
stable transformation
Transformation with a plasmid
DNA plasmid
uptake of plasmid
 
■Figure A3.1.16 Transformation in bacteria
Transduction
Transduction occurs when a bacteriophage (a virus that infects a bacterium – see Chapter A2.3, 
page 94) infects a bacterial cell and then transfers some of the cell’s DNA to another bacterium. The 
mechanism of transduction is actually an error in a phage lytic cycle. During the synthesis of phage 
DNA and proteins, the bacterial chromosome is degraded into small pieces. When the new viruses 
are assembled, coat proteins occasionally surround a piece of bacterial DNA instead of phage genetic 
material. This creates an abnormal phage carrying bacterial chromosomal DNA.
Conjugation
Conjugation involves a direct physical interaction between two bacterial cells and the transfer of 
genetic material from a donor bacterium to a recipient bacterium (Figure A3.1.17). 
The DNA transfer is one-way, i.e. one bacterium donates DNA, and the other bacterium receives the 
DNA. The donor sex pili (singular, pilus) attaches to the recipient. The ability to form sex pili and 
donate DNA during conjugation is due to the presence of an F factor (F = fertility). The F plasmid 
consists of several genes that are required to produce sex pili and also may carry genes that confer a 
growth advantage for the bacterium. After contacting a recipient cell, a sex pilus draws the donor and 
recipient cells closer together. A temporary cytoplasmic mating bridge or tube then forms between 
the two cells, providing an avenue for DNA transfer.
b Plasmid DNA replication
   starts. The free DNA strand
   starts moving through the tube.
c In the recipient cell,
   replication starts on the
   transferred DNA.
d The cells move apart
   and the plasmid in each
   forms a circle.
cut plasmid
in donor cell
conjugation tube
to recipient cell
a Conjugation tube forms
   between a donor and
   a recipient. An enzyme
   cuts the plasmid.
 
■Figure A3.1.17 
Conjugation in bacteria


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
120
 
■A species concept for prokaryotes and other asexually 
reproducing species
As DNA can be exchanged between bacteria, it is difficult to apply the biological species concept to 
them. There are variable rates of genetic transfer between populations and the genotypes of bacteria 
are constantly changing. The requirement in the biological species concept definition to ‘breed and 
produce fertile offspring’ does not apply to bacteria and other asexually reproducing organisms. 
Therefore, species definitions with an evolutionary basis (so called ‘phylogenetic’ ones, as mentioned 
on page 107) may be more appropriate for prokaryotes.
Chromosome number within a species
All individuals within a species have the same number of chromosomes (with the exception of 
those with chromosome non-disjunction – see page 658). Chromosomes occur in even numbers. 
This is because chromosomes occur in pairs (these pairs are called homologous chromosomes), one 
from each parent. To create gametes (sex cells), each set of homologous chromosomes separates 
into a different daughter cell (the gamete) so that each gamete has only one set of chromosomes 
(see page 656). At fertilization, when one male gamete fuses with one female gamete to create 
a genetically unique individual, the diploid (i.e. two of each chromosome) number is restored. 
Homologous chromosomes divide into separate gametes during sexual cell division (meiosis) so 
that the diploid number can be conserved in offspring. If the chromosomes did not separate in this 
way, the number of chromosomes would double in each generation. Within a species, the diploid 
and haploid (i.e. one set of chromosomes) number is constant, allowing gametes to form and 
fertilization to restore the diploid number. Breeding between different species is not possible because 
a mismatch in the number of chromosomes in gametes leads to an inability of chromosomes to 
pair up following fertilization. Anatomical factors can also make individuals from different species 
reproductively incompatible. 
Cross-breeding between closely related species is unlikely to produce fertile offspring if the parent 
chromosome numbers are different. If the offspring produced by hybridization of different but closely 
related species leads to an uneven number of chromosomes, such as in the case of the horse and 
donkey where a mule is produced (Figure A3.1.18), the chromosomes of the offspring will be unable 
to divide equally into gametes. Mules have 63 chromosomes: a number that cannot be divided by 
two, so mules are not fertile (cannot form functional gametes) for this reason.
Horse
Equus caballus
number of chromosomes in
body cells = 64
number of chromosomes in
gametes (sex cells) = 32
×
=
number of chromosomes in
body cells = 62
number of chromosomes in
gametes (sex cells) = 31
Donkey
Equus asinus
number of chromosomes in
body cells = 63
gametes cannot form
Mule
 
■Figure A3.1.18 Cross-breeding between closely related species is unlikely to 
produce fertile offspring if parent chromosome numbers are different


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.1   Diversity of organisms
121
Developing a dichotomous key
The process of identifying unknown organisms – for example, in ecological field work – is important 
but time-consuming. We often attempt this by making comparisons, using identification books that 
are illustrated with drawings and photographs, and provide information on habitat and habits, to 
give us clues as to the identity of organisms.
Alternatively, the use of keys may assist us in the identification of unknown organisms, for example 
a dichotomous key. The advantage of using keys is that it requires careful observation. We learn a 
great deal about the structural features of organisms and get some understanding of how different 
organisms may be related.
The steps in the construction of a dichotomous key are illustrated first (Figures A3.1.19–A3.1.22). 
Follow the steps in Tool 3, then put them into practice yourself.
	
◆Dichotomous key: 
identification key in which 
a group of organisms is 
progressively divided into 
two groups of smaller 
size.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Designing dichotomous keys
The steps in key construction are illustrated using eight 
different tree leaves, as shown in Figure A3.1.19. When 
selecting a leaf, care must be taken to ensure that it 
is entirely representative of most of the leaves of that 
particular tree.
First, each leaf is carefully examined, and the most 
significant structural features are listed in a matrix, 
where their presence (or absence) is recorded against 
each specimen, as shown in Figure A3.1.20.
A Macedonian Oak (Italy/Balkans)
B Picrasma (China)
C Horse Chestnut (Greece)
D Sweet Chestnut (N. Africa)
E Pignut Hickory (N. America)
F Osier (Central and W. Europe) 
G Southern Catalpa (N. America) H Indian Horse Chestnut (Himalaya)
 
■Figure A3.1.19 Collection of leaves for the construction of a dichotomous key
 ➜


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
122
Tree leaves, identified by number
Macedonian Oak
Picrasma
Horse Chestnut
Sweet Chestnut
Pignut Hickory
Osier
Southern Catalpa
Indian Horse Chestnut
Feature of leaf: present (  ) or absent (–)
leaf not divided into leaflets (leaf entire)
leaf consists of leaflets
leaf blade narrow, with almost parallel sides
leaf blade broad
leaflets radiate from one point (palmate)
leaflets arranged in two rows along stalk
leaf / leaflet margin smooth
leaf / leaflet margin toothed, like a saw
leaf blade heart-shaped
leaf blade boat-shaped (widest in middle)
leaflet paddle-shaped, widest near one end
leaflets 5 in number or less
leaflets between 6 and 10 in number
leaflets more than 10 in number
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
 
■Figure A3.1.20 Matrix of characteristics shown by one or more of the sample 
blade heart-shaped
leaflets paddle-shaped
(widest at one end)
leaflets boat-shaped
(widest in middle)
leaflets 5 or less
leaflets more than 10
blade boat-shaped
blade margin smooth
blade margin toothed
like a saw
leaf blade narrow
with parallel sides
(A, F)
leaflets radiate
from one point
(C, H)
leaf blade broad
(D, G)
leaf entire
(A, D, F, G)
leaf divided
into leaflets
(B, C, E, H)
leaflets arranged
in two rows
(B, E)
G
C
H
E
B
D
F
A
START
 
■Figure A3.1.21 Dichotomous flow diagram of leaf characteristics 
From the matrix, a characteristic 
shown by half (or around half) of 
the leaves is selected. This divides 
the specimens into two groups. 
A dichotomous flow diagram 
is constructed, progressively 
dividing the specimens into 
smaller groups. Each division 
point is labelled with the critical 
diagnostic feature(s), as shown in 
Figure A3.1.21.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.1   Diversity of organisms
123
Finally, a dichotomous key 
is constructed, reducing the 
dichotomy points in the flow 
diagram to alternative statements 
to which the answer is either ‘yes’ 
or ‘no’. Each alternative leaf is given 
a number to which the reader must 
refer to carry on the identification, 
until all eight leaves have been 
identified (Figure A3.1.22).
1  Leaves entire, not divided into leaflets
   Leaf blade divided into leaflets
2  Leaf blade narrow, with almost parallel sides
   Leaf blade broad rather than narrow
3  Blade margin toothed like a saw
   Blade margin smooth
4  Blade boat-shaped
   Blade heart-shaped
5  Leaflets radiate from one point
   Leaflets arranged in two rows
6  Leaflets paddle-shaped – widest at one end
   Leaflets boat-shaped – widest in the middle
7  Leaflets 5 (or less) in number
   Leaflets more than 10 in number
2
5
Go to ...
3
4
Macedonian Oak
Osier
Sweet Chestnut
Southern Catalpa
6
7
Horse Chestnut
Indian Horse Chestnut
Pignut Hickory
Picrasma
 
■Figure A3.1.22 Dichotomous key to the sample of eight tree leaves
Top tip!
Limitations of keys include:
l	 The organism might not be in the key.
l	 Individuals of one species may vary in morphology, e.g. show sexual dimorphism.
l	 Terminology can be difficult for non-experts.
l	 There might not be a key available for the organisms under investigation.
l	 Some features cannot be easily established in the field – for example, whether an animal has a 
placenta or not, or whether an animal is endothermic or ectothermic.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Exploring; designing
Design a method of classifying animals and plants that are 
commonly found in gardens or farmland that might be useful 
to an enthusiastic gardener or farmer. Select animals or plants 
that are easy to identify from their morphological (i.e. physical) 
characteristics. Consider and address safety, ethical and 
environmental issues when planning how to collect your organisms.
Inquiry 2: Collecting 
and processing data
Collecting data; processing data
Using your methodology created in 
Inquiry 1, sample insects or plants 
in your local area. What qualitative 
features can you use to separate 
different species?
Tool 3: Mathematics
Designing dichotomous keys
Use the steps laid out in the Tool 3 box starting on page 121 and design a dichotomous 
key for your specimens. Make sure that the key enables each of the species to be 
identified using sets of paired questions. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
124
Identifying species from environmental 
DNA in a habitat using barcodes
As mentioned earlier, approximately 1.8 million species have been described. Some scientists estimate 
that there are between 8 and 10 million species on Earth, although this number may be higher. 
Whichever estimate is used, there is clearly a large number of species that still await identification 
and classification. The current system of taxonomy requires expertise and time – both of which are 
currently lacking as many species face extinction (see Chapter A4.1, page 149).
‘Barcoding’ is a method to identify, track and manage items for sale. Every item you buy in the shops 
is identified by a unique barcode. A barcode has lines and spaces of varying thicknesses printed in 
different combinations. Similarly, the DNA profile produced by gel electrophoresis (see page 605) is 
unique to the individual it comes from, and is made from bars and gaps, forming specific patterns. 
Although individuals may have slightly different genetic profiles, overall ‘barcodes’ can be developed 
which represent the genetic makeup of the species. DNA barcoding is a method of species 
identification using a short section of DNA from a specific gene or genes. The genes chosen have less 
intraspecific (within species) variation than interspecific (between species) variation. For most 
animal groups, biologists use the sequence obtained from the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 
gene. Small samples of DNA can be amplified using a technique called polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) – see page 605.
Traditional taxonomy is a laborious process that requires specialist training. Natural history 
museums, where such work is carried out, have limited staff and capacity to identify species at a 
sufficient speed. In contrast, DNA barcoding offers a fast and accurate technique to identify species, 
avoiding the limitations of traditional methods (for example, inability to identify damaged or partial 
specimens, and the problem of morphological variation within species). 
Collection data, relating to the location and environment from which the specimens were sampled, 
along with photographs and genetic data, can be made available on the internet so that scientists 
from around the world can access information about the species (Figure A3.1.23).
specimen
collection data
photograph
tissue sample
extract
DNA
PCR
amplify
sequence
DNA barcode
web-accessible specimen
data and DNA barcode
 
■Figure A3.1.23 Species identification data available on the internet 
Once barcodes for a sufficient number of species have been established, environments can be 
sampled to obtain DNA from a variety of organisms, which allows the biodiversity of habitats to be 
investigated rapidly.
	
◆DNA barcoding: 
species identification 
using short sections 
of DNA.
	ATL A3.1B 
Find out about an 
area where DNA 
barcoding has been 
used to establish the 
taxonomy of species in 
the environment. How 
can this information 
be used to carry 
out surveys rapidly 
to establish the 
biodiversity of sample 
sites? How could this 
information be used to 
establish the effect of 
human disturbance on 
natural systems?
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What might cause a 
species to persist or 
go extinct?
2	 How do species 
exemplify both 
continuous and 
discontinuous 
patterns of 
variation? 
