HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
125
A3.2
Classification and cladistics
•	 What tools are used to classify organisms into taxonomic groups?
•	 How do cladistics methods differ from traditional taxonomic methods?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A3.2.1 	 Need for classification of organisms (HL only)
	 A3.2.2 	 Difficulties classifying organisms into the traditional hierarchy of taxa (HL only)
	 A3.2.3 	 Advantages of classification corresponding to evolutionary relationships 
(HL only)
	 A3.2.4 	 Clades as groups of organisms with common ancestry and shared characteristics 
(HL only)
	 A3.2.5 	 Gradual accumulation of sequence differences as the basis for estimates of 
when clades diverged from a common ancestor (HL only)
	 A3.2.6 	 Base sequences of genes or amino acid sequences of proteins as the basis for 
constructing cladograms (HL only)
	 A3.2.7 	 Analysing cladograms (HL only)
	 A3.2.8 	 Using cladistics to investigate whether the classification of groups corresponds 
to evolutionary relationships (HL only)
	 A3.2.9 	 Classification of all organisms into three domains using evidence from rRNA 
base sequences (HL only)
The need to classify organisms
Given the great variety of life on Earth, and the immense number of species, there is a need to 
group organisms together based on shared similarities. In chemistry, the periodic table is the central 
organizing framework for all elements. Similarly, classification gives biology an organizational 
structure that facilitates the study of the subject. Rather than a series of unrelated facts, taxonomy 
gives biology a rationale for grouping organisms based on shared characteristics, which in turn 
reveals functional and structural similarities and differences. After classification is completed, a 
broad-range of further study is carried out, which would not be possible without first classifying 
the organisms. 
Concept: Unity
The system of classification is universal (i.e. everyone uses it). By using the same 
methodology and language to describe and group species, collaboration is possible 
between scientists around the world.
The quickest way to classify living things is on their immediate and obvious similarities and 
differences. For example, we might classify together animals that fly, simply because the essential 
organ, wings, are so easily seen. This would include almost all birds and many insects, as well as 
the bats and certain fossil dinosaurs. However, resemblances between the wings of the bird and the 
Concept: 
Diversity
Given the great 
diversity of life, 
there is a need to 
classify organisms 
in order to provide 
a framework 
for biological 
knowledge. This 
in turn reveals 
functional and 
structural similarities 
and differences 
between organisms.
Theme A 
Unity and diversity – Organisms


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
126
insect are superficial. Both are aerofoils (structures that generate ‘lift’ when moved through the air) 
but they are built from different tissues and have different origins in the body. This will be returned 
to in Chapter A4.1.
Difficulties classifying organisms into 
the traditional hierarchy of taxa
 
■The scheme of classification 
In classification, the aim is to use as many characteristics as possible when placing similar organisms 
together and separating dissimilar ones. Just as similar species are grouped together into the same 
genus (plural, genera), similar genera are grouped together into families.
This approach is extended from families to orders, then classes, phyla and kingdoms. This is the 
hierarchical scheme of classification, with each successive group containing more and more different 
kinds of organism. In a natural classification, the genus and accompanying higher taxa consist of all 
the species that have evolved from one common ancestral species.
The taxa used in taxonomy are given in Figure A3.2.1.
Kingdom:  Plantae
Phylum:  Angiospermophyta
Class:  Dicotyledonae
Order:  Fagales
Family:  Fagaceae
Genus:  Quercus
other classes
other orders
other genera
other species
Species:  robur
‘common oak’
kingdom  the largest and most inclusive
grouping, e.g. plants, animals, fungi, etc.
phylum  organisms constructed
on a similar plan
class  a grouping of orders
within a phylum
order  a group of apparently
related families
family  a group of apparently
related genera
genus  a group of similar and
closely related species
species  a group of organisms
capable of interbreeding to produce
fertile offspring
(a mnemonic to remember the hierarchy of taxa:
King Peter Called Out For Genuine Scientists)
other families
other phyla
Kingdom:  Animalia
Phylum:  Chordata
Class:  Mammalia
Order:  Primates
Family:  Hominidae
Genus:  Homo
Species:
other phyla
other classes
other orders
sapiens
‘modern
human’
habilis
‘handy human’
erectus
‘upright human’
extinct species – we learn about
them from fossil evidence only
other families
Normally several species occur
in one genus, many genera make
a family, several families make an
order, and so on. However, this
family contains only one genus.
 
■Figure A3.2.1 The taxa used in taxonomy, applied to genera from two different kingdoms, Plantae and Animalia


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
127
Domains and kingdoms
At one time the living world seemed to divide naturally into two kingdoms consisting of the plants 
(with autotrophic nutrition) and the animals (with heterotrophic nutrition). These two kingdoms 
grew from the original disciplines of biology, namely botany, the study of plants, and zoology, the 
study of animals. Fungi and micro-organisms were conveniently ‘added’ to botany.
Initially there was only one problem: fungi possessed the typically ‘animal’ heterotrophic nutrition 
but were superficially ‘plant-like’ in appearance. Then, with the use of the electron microscope, came 
the discovery of the two types of cell structure, namely prokaryotic and eukaryotic (page 79). As a 
result bacteria, which have prokaryotic cells, could no longer be ‘plants’ since plants have eukaryotic 
cells. The division of living things into kingdoms needed changing. This led to the division of living 
things into five kingdoms rather than two (Table A3.2.1). 
Today, taxonomists sometimes reclassify groups of species when new evidence (usually molecular 
based) shows that a previous taxon contains species that have evolved from different ancestral species.
 
■Table A3.2.1 The five kingdom model of classification
Prokaryotae the prokaryote kingdom, the bacteria and cyanobacteria (a group of photosynthetic bacteria), 
predominately unicellular organisms
Protoctista 
the protoctistan kingdom (eukaryotes), predominately unicellular, and seen as resembling the 
ancestors of the fungi, plants and animals
Fungi 
the fungal kingdom (eukaryotes), predominately multicellular organisms, non-motile and with 
heterotrophic nutrition
Plantae 
the plant kingdom (eukaryotes), multicellular organisms, non-motile, with autotrophic nutrition
Animalia
the animal kingdom (eukaryotes), multicellular organisms, motile, with heterotrophic nutrition
*Note that viruses are not classified as living organisms.
When RNA sequencing became possible, American microbiologist and biophysicist Carl Woese 
theorized that since all living organisms contained ribosomes, the ribosomal RNA sequence could be 
used to determine the relatedness of all organisms.
His work revealed that the prokaryotes comprise two distinct groups – the bacteria and the archaea 
– that diverged early in the history of life on Earth. The living world therefore has three major 
domains: eubacteria, archaea and eukarya.
The five-kingdom method of classifying species as shown in Table A3.2.1 was modified in the 1970s 
following these new discoveries in the areas of biochemistry and genetics, leading to the introduction 
of a classification group even larger than the kingdoms – domains. The prokaryotae were divided 
into two domains, eubacteria and archaea, with the remaining four eukaryote kingdoms forming the 
eukarya domain (see more details later in this chapter on page 137).
It can be difficult to determine which similarities between species are most relevant when 
grouping species.
l	 It is important to distinguish similarities that are based on shared ancestry from those that have 
evolved independently but under similar selective pressures and so appear the same or similar, for 
example human and octopus eyes (known as analogous structures).
l	 Species that are similar in appearance may not be closely related – their resemblance is due to 
analogous adaptations to very similar environments (for example, both bats and dragonflies have 
wings for flight, see Chapter A4.1, page 146). In contrast, structures that are homologous may 
look very different, such as forelimbs in vertebrates, but represent common evolutionary origins.
l	 Morphology (form and structure) of organisms can lead to mistakes in classification, due to 
misinterpreting whether structures are analogous or homologous. Base or amino acid sequences 
are more accurate ways of determining members of a clade (see below) because they represent 
true homology.
	
◆Kingdom: second 
highest taxonomic rank, 
below domain.
	
◆Domain: the highest 
taxonomic rank in the 
hierarchical biological 
classification system, 
above the kingdom 
level. There are three 
domains of life: archaea, 
eubacteria and eukarya.
Link
Analogous and 
homologous 
structures will be 
covered in detail 
in Chapter A4.1, 
page 145. 
1	 In Figure A3.2.1, 
one plant and one 
animal species are 
classified from 
kingdom to species 
level. Suggest 
how these flow 
diagrams could be 
modified to show 
their classification 
from domain level.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
128
Nature of science: Theories 
A paradigm shift in classification
Charles Darwin noted that for each species a ‘number of intermediate forms must have existed, 
linking together all species in each group by gradations as fine as our existing varieties’. A fixed 
ranking of taxa (kingdom, phylum and so on) is arbitrary because it does not reflect the gradation 
of variation. The traditional hierarchy does not always match patterns of divergence caused by 
evolution. An alternative classification system is cladistics, using unranked clades (see below). 
Cladistics is a very powerful methodology for classification. It is entirely based on the observation of 
shared derived characteristics known as synapomorphies. It categorizes organisms based on these 
shared derived characteristics that can be traced to a group’s most recent common ancestor and are 
not present in more distant ancestors. Relationships are shown as evolutionary trees. This alternative 
classification system is an example of the paradigm shift that sometimes occurs in scientific theories. 
Paradigm shifts take place when a new theory replaces an old one.
	
◆Cladistics: a 
classification system used 
to construct evolutionary 
trees. Organisms are 
categorized based 
on shared derived 
characteristics that can be 
traced to a group’s most 
recent common ancestor 
and are not present in 
more distant ancestors. 
Characteristics can be 
anatomical, physiological, 
behavioural, or genetic 
and protein sequences.
	
◆Clade: a group of 
organisms that have 
evolved from a common 
ancestor.
	
◆Cladogram: a 
diagram used in cladistics 
that shows evolutionary 
relations among 
organisms.
Advantages of classification corresponding 
to evolutionary relationships
Ideally, a classification system should show the evolutionary relationships between organisms. 
A phylogenetic classification system is based on evolutionary relationships and not just similarities in 
physical traits that may or may not have evolutionary significance. Through the process of evolution, 
organisms have changed into groups with a common ancestry and common characteristics. 
By grouping organisms using biochemical information, such as that provided by DNA and proteins, 
changes in species though time can be mapped on to a ‘tree of life’, showing the interconnections 
and true evolutionary relationships between species (see page 135 later in this chapter, and 
Chapter A4.1, page 141). The characteristics of organisms within such a group can be predicted 
because they are shared within a clade. 
Classification systems that use morphological characteristics do not necessarily show evolutionary 
relationships because analogous structures can evolve separately in groups of organisms that do not 
share a recent common ancestor. 
Clades 
When classifying living things using evolutionary relationships, taxonomists display these 
relationships on phylogenetic trees called cladograms. Figure A3.2.2 is an example of a cladogram. 
lizard
crocodile
bird
morphology
this is what the classification of these three
species would be based on morphology
rather than common ancestors
bird
crocodile
lizard
time
classification by the grouping together of organisms
with a more recent common ancestor to produce a
cladogram
 
■Figure A3.2.2 Cladistics (left diagram) – one of two ways of classifying
2	 Distinguish 
between the 
two diagrams in 
Figure A3.2.2.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
129
In cladistics, classification is based upon an analysis of relatedness, and the product is a cladogram. 
A clade is a group of organisms that have evolved from a common ancestor. Figure A3.2.2 shows 
that a bird, crocodile and lizard all have a common ancestor, but that the bird and crocodile share a 
more recent ancestor. A clade is monophyletic, that is, one that includes all the descendants of one, 
but only one, ancestor. 
Cladograms have two important features:
l	 branch points in the tree – representing the time at which a divide between two taxa occurred
l	 the degree of divergence between branches – representing the differences that have developed 
between the two taxa since they diverged. 
The most objective evidence for placing organisms in the same clade comes from base sequences of 
genes or amino acid sequences of proteins. Morphological traits can be used to assign organisms 
to clades, although care must be taken to ensure that these characteristics are homologous and 
not analogous.
In summary, a cladogram:
l	 shows patterns of shared characteristics
l	 is a diagram that shows the evolutionary relationships among a group of organisms and classifies 
organisms according to the order in time at which branches arise along their phylogenetic tree.
Taxonomists ponder the question: which features are more significant in a phylogenetic taxonomy, 
and so should receive the greater emphasis in devising a scheme? Differences in DNA and protein 
sequences provide a system that accurately maps the relationship between species, whereas 
morphological differences, while being the only option for many organisms (for example, those 
only with fossil remains), can lead to problems where convergent evolution has taken place (see 
Chapter A4.1, page 145).
Cladistics was developed from a body of taxonomic theory known as phylogenetic systematics and 
is organised around three principles: (i) monophyletic taxa are natural, (ii) organisms are related 
through evolutionary descent, and (iii) evolutionary modifications uniquely shared by organisms are 
evidence of their unique phylogenetic history.
Evidence of evolutionary relationships comes from a range of studies (Table A3.2.2).
 
■Table A3.2.2 Evidence of evolutionary relationships
Palaeontology 
(study of fossils)
Fossils tell us about organisms in the geological past. Sometimes they represent 
intermediate forms – links between groups of organisms, such as Archaeopteryx, a 
possible ‘missing link’ between non-avian feathered dinosaurs and birds.
Comparative 
biochemistry
The composition of nucleic acids and cell proteins establish degrees of relatedness – 
closely related organisms show fewer differences in the composition of specific nucleic 
acids and cell proteins.
Comparative 
embryology
Study of the development of an organism from zygote to adult may reveal its evolution. 
For example, the arrangement of arteries and development of the heart in early 
vertebrate embryos follow similar patterns.
Comparative 
anatomy
Studies of comparative anatomy show that many structural features are basically similar.
 
■Limitations of cladistics
While cladistics is a powerful tool for testing phylogenetic hypotheses, it is not without conceptual 
and practical problems. Cladistics makes the implicit assumption that these shared derived 
characters are the result of linear or vertical genetic transfer: vertical in the sense of a pedigree, with 
genetic transfer only from parent to offspring. This is a reasonable assumption in most eukaryotes.
Lateral or horizontal genetic transfer, e.g., transduction or conjugation (see page 119), however, 
disregards this assumption. Cladistics does not really have a mechanism for dealing with this 
problem so it has been of little use for taxonomy of prokaryotes.
Top tip!
The difficulty that 
cladistics creates is that 
there is no obvious way 
in which to create such 
a hierarchical taxonomy 
(and therefore a 
naming system) from a 
phylogeny (the history 
of the evolution of 
a species or group). 
There are, for practical 
purposes, a finite 
number of levels in a 
taxonomic hierarchy 
but an indefinite 
number of ancestors in 
a phylogeny.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
130
Originally bacterial taxonomists used a technique called numerical taxonomy, where as many 
physical and biochemical characteristics as possible (sometimes as many as 200) would be identified 
in a group of related bacteria. A matrix would then be created that would group those isolates that 
had the most shared characteristics together.
This was a completely morphological method (that is, based solely on phenotype). It was an expensive 
and arduous process, but it seemed to result in robust groupings. Unfortunately, it does not give any 
insight into how the identified groups were related to each other in an evolutionary sense.
There is significant genetic variation in bacterial species. There can be as much as 30% DNA 
sequence variation between two E. coli genomes and, unlike eukaryotes, much of that difference is 
due to the presence or absence of genes, not just sequence variations between different versions of 
the same gene. In other words, one E. coli strain can have hundreds of genes that another strain of 
E. coli completely lacks.
So, the approach that bacterial taxonomists currently use is what is called the phylo-morphological 
species concept. This is uses a combination of ribosomal phylogenetic information and phenotypic 
characteristics to form groups of similar organisms, and then using a somewhat arbitrary threshold of 
70% overall DNA similarity to delineate species boundaries.
Sequence differences as the 
basis for clades divergence
Today, the similarities and differences in the biochemistry of organisms have become extremely 
important in establishing the evolutionary links between different species and the point at which 
common ancestors existed. For example, the β chain of haemoglobin, which is built from 146 amino 
acid residues, shows variation in the sequence of amino acids in different species. Haemoglobin 
structure is determined by inherited genes, so the more closely related species are, the more likely 
their amino acid sequence is to match (Table A3.2.3). Variations are thought to have arisen by 
mutation of an ‘ancestral’ gene for haemoglobin. If so, the longer ago a species diverged from a 
common ancestor, the more likely it is that differences may have arisen.
 
■Table A3.2.3 Number of amino acid differences in β chain of 
haemoglobin compared to human haemoglobin
Species
Differences
Species
Differences
human
0
kangaroo
38
gorilla
1
chicken
45
gibbon
2
frog
67
rhesus monkey
8
lamprey
125
mouse
27
sea slug (mollusc)
127
Similar studies have been made of the differences in the polypeptide chains of other protein 
molecules, including ones common to all eukaryotes and prokaryotes. One such is the universally 
occurring electron transport carrier, cytochrome c (see page 124).
 
■Biochemical variation used as an evolutionary or 
molecular clock
Biochemical changes like those discussed above may occur at a constant rate and, if so, may be used 
as a molecular clock. If the rate of change can be reliably estimated, it records the time that has 
passed between the separation of evolutionary lines. 
	
◆Molecular clock: a 
measure of evolutionary 
change over time based 
on the mutation rate of 
DNA sequences or the 
proteins they encode; can 
be used for estimating 
how long ago two related 
organisms diverged from 
a common ancestor.
Top tip!
The molecular clock 
can only give estimates 
because mutation 
rates are affected 
by the length of the 
generation time, the 
size of a population, 
the intensity of 
selective pressure and 
other factors.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
131
The construction of cladograms
DNA and protein comparisons are done by aligning the sequences from different species and using 
computer software to identify the best phylogenetic tree joining the sequences, and thus inferring the 
phylogeny of the species.
 
■Using amino acid sequences to build cladograms
Cladograms can be constructed using amino acid sequences of proteins. An example comes from 
immunological studies – a means of detecting differences in specific proteins of species and, 
therefore (indirectly), their genetic relatedness. 
Serum is a liquid produced from blood samples from which blood cells and fibrinogen have been 
removed. Protein molecules present in the serum act as antigens if the serum is injected into an 
animal with an immune system that lacks these proteins (page 195). 
Typically, a rabbit is used when investigating relatedness to humans. In the rabbit, the injected 
serum causes the production of antibodies against the human proteins. Then, serum produced 
from the rabbit’s blood (now containing antibodies against human proteins) can be tested against 
serum from a range of animals. The more closely 
related a test animal is to humans, the greater 
the reaction of rabbit antibodies with human-like 
antigens (bringing about observable precipitation, 
Figure A3.2.3). 
The precipitation produced by the reaction of 
treated rabbit serum with human serum is taken 
as 100%. For each species tested, the greater the 
precipitation, the more recently the species shared 
a common ancestor with humans. This technique, 
called comparative serology, has been used by 
taxonomists to establish phylogenetic links in 
mammals and in invertebrates.
sample of human serum (blood minus
cells and ﬁbrinogens) obtained
human serum
injected into
rabbit
later, sample of rabbit’s blood taken
for anti-human antibodies (rabbit
antibodies to human proteins)
serum from other mammals mixed 
with anti-human antibodies
the more closely 
related the animal 
is to humans, the 
greater the 
precipitation
human serum
anti-human antibodies
spider monkey
serum
anti-human antibodies
dog serum
anti-human antibodies
Immunological studies are a means of detecting differences in speciﬁc proteins of species
and, therefore (indirectly), their relatedness.
 
■Figure A3.2.3 Investigating evolutionary relationships by the immune reaction


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
132
 
■Table A3.2.4 Relatedness investigated via the immune reaction
1
2
3
4
5
Species
Precipitation/%
Difference from 
human/%
Difference to 
common ancestor 
(half difference 
from human)
Postulated time 
since common 
ancestor/mya
human
100
–
–
–
chimpanzee
95
5
2.5
4
gorilla
95
5
2.5
4
orang-utan
85
15
7.5
13
gibbon
82
18
9
15
baboon
73
27
13.5
23
spider monkey
60
40
20
34
lemur
35
65
32.5
55
dog
25
75
37.5
64
kangaroo
8
92
46
79
The list of animals tested in this way is given in Table A3.2.4. Of course, we 
do not know the common ancestor to these animals and the blood of that 
ancestor is not available to test. However, if the sequence of the 584 amino 
acids that make up the blood protein albumin changes at a constant rate, 
the percentage immunological ‘distance’ between humans and any of these 
animals will be a sum of the distance ‘back’ to the common ancestor plus 
the difference ‘forward’ to the listed animal. Hence, the difference between a 
listed animal and human can be halved to estimate the difference between a 
modern form and the common ancestor.
The divergent evolution of the primates is known from geological (fossil) 
evidence. So, the forward rate of change since the lemur gives us the rate 
of the molecular clock – namely 35% in 60 million years, or 0.6% every 
million years.
This calculation has been applied to all the data (Table A3.2.4, column 5).
We can construct a cladogram based on the biochemical data in 
Table A3.2.4, as shown in Figure A3.2.4.
Nature of science: Hypotheses
Different criteria for judgement can lead to different hypotheses. Parsimony is the concept that the 
simplest explanation for the data is preferred. In the analysis of phylogeny, parsimony means that 
a hypothesis of relationships that requires the smallest number of character changes is most likely 
to be correct. Parsimony analysis is used to select the most probable cladogram in which observed 
sequence variation between clades is accounted for with the smallest number of sequence changes.
The term ‘Occam’s razor’ has the same meaning as parsimony and is the term more often used in 
everyday life. It states that the simplest explanation is usually the best one and advises not to make 
more assumptions than you absolutely need to.
human
chimpanzee
gorilla
orang-utan
gibbon
baboon
spider monkey
lemur
dog
kangaroo
0
10
time since common ancestor/mya
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
 
■Figure A3.2.4 A cladogram based on 
immunological evidence in Table A3.2.4


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
133
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
mya
DNA extracted
from cells and
‘cut’ into
fragments,
about 500
bases long
fragments are heated
to cause them to
become single strands
single strands are mixed
with DNA strands from
another species, prepared
in exactly the same way
(therefore comparable)
base pairing causes
strands of DNA
to align with
complementary DNA
the greater the
complementarity
of the two strands,
the more bonds link
them together
high complementarity
low complementarity
difference in DNA /%
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
common chimp
pygmy chimp
human
gorilla
orang-utan
common gibbon
siamang gibbon
old world 
monkey
0
DNA hybridization is a technique that involves matching the DNA 
of different species to discover how closely they are related.
The closeness of the two DNAs is measured by finding 
the temperature at which they separate – the fewer 
bonds formed, the lower the temperature required.
The degree of relatedness of the DNA of primate species can be 
correlated with the estimated number of years since they shared a 
common ancestor.  
 
■Figure A3.2.5 Genetic difference between DNA samples
 
■Relatedness measured from 
DNA samples
Cladograms can also be constructed using base sequences 
of genes.
It is possible to measure the relatedness of different groups 
of organisms by the amount of difference between specific 
molecules, such as differences in the base sequence of genes 
in DNA. The genetic differences between the DNA of various 
organisms give us data on degrees of divergence. Look at 
Figure A3.2.5. Here, the degree of relatedness of the DNA of 
primate species suggests the number of years that have elapsed 
since the various primates shared a common ancestor.
In cladograms, the more derived characteristics two organisms 
share, the closer their evolutionary relationship (i.e. the more 
recently their common ancestor lived).
l	 Points at which two branches form are called nodes, which 
represent speciation events (see Figure A3.2.6 overleaf).
l	 Close relationships are shown by a recent fork – the closer 
the fork in the branch between two organisms, the closer 
their relationship.
l	 Terminal branches lead to terminal nodes that represent 
organisms for which data exist (genetic or amino acid 
sequences); the organisms may be either still living (extant) 
or extinct.
l	 The root is the central trunk of a cladogram that indicates 
the ancestor common to all groups branching from it.
Cladograms provide strong evidence for evolutionary 
relationships, although they cannot be regarded as absolute 
proof. This is because they are constructed based on the 
assumption that the smallest number of mutations possible 
account for differences between species (see below). If such 
assumptions are incorrect, errors may occur in cladograms. 
By using several different cladograms that have been derived 
independently using different data, such errors can be avoided.
Figure A3.2.7 overleaf shows that the lion and jaguar (Panthera 
leo and Panthera onca) are the most closely related cat species.
	
◆Node: a branching point from the ancestral population in a 
cladogram. It represents a speciation event.
	
◆Terminal branch: indicates both extinct and extant species in 
a cladogram, leading to a terminal node.
	
◆Terminal node: represents the hypothetical last common 
ancestral interbreeding population of the taxon labelled at a tip of 
a cladogram.
	
◆Root: the central trunk of a cladogram, indicating the common 
ancestor to all groups that branch from it.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
134
species
D
species
C
species
B
species
A
unique ancestor
of D only
common ancestor
of both C and D,
but not A and B
common ancestor of
A, B, C and D
F
G
second
outgroup
sister
group
ingroup
D
E
A
B
C
terminal branches
node = speciation event
root = common ancestor
D
C
B
A
species A, B, C
and D all exist in
modern times
recent
time
past
time
 
■Figure A3.2.6 A cladogram shows evolutionary 
relationships among a group of organisms
Common mistake
Do not look at the end positions of species on a 
cladogram to determine relatedness, look at the nodes on 
the cladogram.
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Classifying and cladogram analysis
Cladograms can be used to ensure that the 
classification of species reflects evolutionary 
relationships. Analyse the cladogram in Figure A3.2.7. 
Which species diverged from the ancestor first? 
Which species is most closely related to the snow 
leopard? Which species do leopards share a common 
ancestor with? Comment on the evolution of species 
in the genus Panthera.
Common mistake
The branching off points of a cladogram are often poorly 
explained. The points where a cladogram branches (the 
nodes) represent common ancestors to the species that come 
after the branch point. All branch tips arising from a given 
branching point are descendants of the common ancestor at 
that branching point. 
Top tip!
You should be able to deduce evolutionary relationships, 
common ancestors and clades from a cladogram. You should 
understand the terms ‘root’, ‘node’ and ‘terminal branch’, and 
also that a node represents a hypothetical common ancestor.
3	 Discuss how cladograms can be used in classification 
of organisms.
TOK
Think about the different classification systems that have 
been used – for example the fixed ranking of taxa versus 
classification corresponding to evolutionary relationships. 
How has each system resulted in different conclusions about 
the relationship between species and the way in which life is 
interrelated? To what extent do the classification systems we 
use in the pursuit of knowledge affect the conclusions that 
we reach? 
evolutionary past
lion (Panthera leo)
jaguar (Panthera onca)
leopard (Panthera pardus)
tiger (Panthera tigris)
snow leopard (Panthera uncia)
clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa)
 
■Figure A3.2.7 Part of the phylogenetic tree for the Felidae


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
135
	ATL A3.2A 
Access this website: https://tidal.northwestern.edu/blog/bat
In this interactive activity you create cladograms and add distinguishing features that determine 
branches in the diagram. The programme will give you a rating to determine how successful you 
have been.
1	 Click on the ‘list’ option on the right-hand side of the screen and select the game level you 
want to work on (there are levels 1–7). Each level has a different selection of organisms and get 
progressively harder.
2	 Drag the images of the organisms into the central part of the screen. Rearrange them to create 
the cladogram that best resembles their relationships.
3	 Drag the distinguishing features (each has a different coloured dot, e.g. Level 1 orange – cells 
with nuclei) from the left-hand side of the screen on to the correct node, which defines the 
shared features of a clade.
4	 At the end of the activity, you will be given a score. You may need to work with a partner in the 
later stages and discuss the harder levels in groups. Can you complete all seven levels?
Investigating whether the 
classification of groups corresponds 
to evolutionary relationships
Cladistics can be used to investigate whether the established classification of groups corresponds to 
evolutionary relationships.
 
■Reclassification of the figwort family (Scrophulariaceae)
The Scrophulariaceae (figwort family) – one of the groups of flowering plants that has long been 
recognized by plant taxonomists – was a large and varied family. Typically, genera of this family 
had irregular (zygomorphic) flowers, like those of the snapdragon and the foxglove, for example. 
The flowering plant families were designated before most biochemical studies were applied to plant 
taxonomy. Nevertheless, many families appear to be (largely) natural classifications, for example the 
rose family (Rosaceae), which includes many fruit plants, and the Crucifereae, which includes many 
economically important plants.
Today, flowering plant classification is being revisited. (Indeed, all classification is being revisited.) 
Most evidence for plant evolutionary relationships now comes from a comparison of DNA sequences 
in only one to three genes (these are conserved genes – see page 25) found in the chloroplasts of the 
plant cells. These genes are of modest length, each about 1000 nucleotides long. However, they have 
provided more secure information regarding evolutionary history than the differences in anatomy 
and morphology on which the traditional classifications were based.
In the reorganization of the figwort family, these three genes have been compared from many species 
of plants, including some formerly classified in the Scrophulariceae. The outcome has been the 
repositioning of several genera into other families (and the reassignment of others, previously in other 
families, to the newly defined Scrophulariaceae). Examine the cladogram that sums up the evidence 
and identifies some major changes (Figure A3.2.8 overleaf) and the illustrations of representative 
plants involved (Figure A3.2.9).
Top tip!
This case study is an 
example of how plant 
species have been 
transferred between 
families and is useful to 
develop understanding 
of the processes 
involved. Note: you 
are not required to 
memorize the details of 
the case study.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Organisms
136
A note of caution
Despite these additional, largely biochemical, sources of evidence, the evolutionary relationships of 
organisms are still only partly understood. Consequently, current taxonomy is only partly a 
phylogenetic classification.
Nature of science: Falsification
You should appreciate that theories and other scientific knowledge claims may eventually be 
falsified. In this example, similarities in morphology between the flowering plants was due to 
convergent evolution rather than common ancestry and suggested a classification that was shown 
to be false by cladistics.
4	 Suggest why 
molecular and 
computing 
techniques 
have made the 
construction 
of cladograms 
more accurate.
Other families including
    Orobanchaceae
      – herbaceous root-parasites,
      some deprived of chlorophyll
 
 
This family now includes genera previously in the
 
 
Scrophulariaceae including:
 
 
Pedicularis, e.g. P. palustris (Red-rattle)
 
 
Rhinanthus, e.g. R. minor (Yellow-rattle)
 
 
Melampyrum, e.g. M. pratense (Cow-wheat)
 
 
Euphrasia, e.g. E. micranthus (Eye-bright)
 
 
Odontites, e.g. O. verna (Red bartsia)
Other families including
    Plantaginaceae
      (Veronicaceae)
       
 
This family now includes genera previously in the
 
 
Scrophulariaceae including:
 
 
Antirrhinum, e.g. A. majus (Snapdragon)
 
 
Digitalis, e.g. D. purpurea (Foxglove)
 
 
Veronica, e.g. V. officinalis (Speedwell)
Alonsoa
Hemimeris
Nemesia
Aptosimum
Leucophyllum
Myoporum
Androya
Buddleja
Nicodemia
Gomphostigma
Selago
Hebenstretia
Zaluzianskya
Verbascum
Scrophularia
62
branch
66
50
100
100
100
**
**
Scrophulariaceae
**
**genera formerly
    placed in another
    family
100
100
86
48
common
ancestor
64
99
bootstrap
value
 
■Figure A3.2.8 Cladogram summarizing changes to the family Scrophulariaceae: 
‘bootstrap values’ provide a measure of accuracy of sample estimates. On a scale 
of 0–100 it is a measure of support for individual branches in the cladogram
 
■Figure A3.2.9 Plants associated with the 
Scrophulariaceae, now and previously
Plants of the family Orobanchaceae, previously 
in the large, diverse family Scrophulariaceae
Yellow-rattle 
(Rhinanthus minor)
Eye-bright  
(Euphrasia micranthus)
Figwort  
(Scrophularia nodosa)
Mullein  
(Verbascum lychnitis)
Foxglove  
(Digitalis purpurea)
Antirrhinum 
(Antirrhinum majus)
Plants of the modern family Scrophulariaceae
Plants of the family Plantaginaceae, 
previously in the family Scrophulariaceae


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A3.2   Classification and cladistics
137
Classification of all organisms into three domains
The realization that prokaryotes are composed of two very different groups followed the discovery 
of the distinctive biochemistry of the bacteria found in extremely hostile environments (the 
extremophiles), such as the ‘heat-loving’ bacteria found in hot springs at about 70 ºC (see 
Theme A2.1, page 47). This led on to the new scheme of classification. These micro-organisms of 
extreme habitats have cells that we can identify as prokaryotic. However, one group of prokaryotes, 
now identified as the domain archaea (see below), contains rRNA that is unique and has molecular 
regions distinctly different from the rRNA of other prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The fact that RNA 
molecules present in the ribosomes of extremophiles are different from those of previously known 
bacteria is the key piece of evidence that has led to the reclassification of life. 
Further analyses of their biochemistry in comparison with that of other groups has suggested new 
evolutionary relationships (Figure A2.1.8, page 44).
As a result, we now recognize three major forms of life, called domains. The organisms of each 
domain share a distinctive, unique pattern of ribosomal RNA and there are other differences which 
establish their evolutionary relationships (Table A3.2.5). These domains are:
l	 the archaea (the extremophile prokaryotes)
l	 the eubacteria (the true bacteria)
l	 the eukarya (all eukaryotic cells – the protoctista, fungi, plants and animals).
 
■Table A3.2.5 Biochemical differences between the domains 
Biochemical features
Domains
Archaea 
Eubacteria 
Eukarya
DNA of chromosome(s)
circular genome
circular genome
linear chromosomes
Bound protein (histone) 
present in DNA
present
absent
present
Introns in genes
typically absent 
typically absent
frequent
Cell wall
present – not made of 
peptidoglycan
present – made of 
peptidoglycan
sometimes present – 
never made of 
peptidoglycan
Lipids of cell membrane 
bilayer
archaeal membranes contain lipids that differ from those of eubacteria and 
eukaryotes (Figure A3.2.10)
O
P
O–
O–
O
hydrocarbon tails
– branched
Phospholipids of archaeal membranes
Phospholipids of eubacteria
and eukaryote membranes
L-glycerol
D-glycerol
phosphate group
phosphate group
ether linkage
ester linkage
C
O
C
O
C
O
P
O–
H
CH2
H2C
O–
O
hydrocarbon tails
– unbranched
CH2
C
C
O
O
O
O
H2C
C 
 
■Figure A3.2.10 Lipid structure of cell membranes in the three domains 
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How can similarities between distantly related organisms be explained?
2	 What are some examples of ideas over which biologists disagree?
Top tip!
The archaea have been 
found in many extreme 
environments, such 
as deep ocean vents, 
geysers, salt pans and 
polar environments. 
However, their habitats 
are broader than this: 
some species occur 
only in anaerobic 
conditions, such as in 
the guts of termites 
and cattle, others at 
the bottom of ponds 
and swamps among 
the rotting plants.
TOK
A major advance in 
the study of bacteria 
was the recognition, in 
1977, by Carl Woese 
that archaea have 
a separate line of 
evolutionary descent 
to bacteria. Famous 
scientists, including 
Luria and Mayr, 
objected to his division 
of the prokaryotes. This 
poses the question: 
to what extent is 
conservatism in 
science desirable?
