Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
138
A4.1
Evolution and speciation
•	 What is the evidence for evolution?
•	 How do analogous and homologous structures exemplify commonality and diversity?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A4.1.1 	 Evolution as change in the heritable characteristics of a population
	 A4.1.2 	 Evidence for evolution from base sequences in DNA or RNA and amino acid 
sequences in proteins
	 A4.1.3 	 Evidence for evolution from selective breeding of domesticated animals and 
crop plants
	 A4.1.4 	 Evidence for evolution from homologous structures
	 A4.1.5 	 Convergent evolution as the origin of analogous structures
	 A4.1.6 	 Speciation by splitting of pre-existing species
	 A4.1.7 	 Roles of reproductive isolation and differential selection in speciation
	 A4.1.8 	 Differences and similarities between sympatric and allopatric speciation 
(HL only)
	 A4.1.9 	 Adaptive radiation as a source of biodiversity (HL only)
	 A4.1.10 	 Barriers to hybridization and sterility of interspecific hybrids as mechanisms for 
preventing the mixing of alleles between species (HL only)
	 A4.1.11 	 Abrupt speciation in plants by hybridization and polyploidy (HL only)
Evolution as change in the heritable 
characteristics of a population 
Today, it is generally accepted that present-day flora and fauna have arisen by change (‘descent with 
modification’), probably very gradual change, from pre-existing forms of life. By evolution we mean 
the development of life, from its earliest beginnings to the diversity of organisms we know about 
today, living and extinct. Evolution has occurred over geological time, but modern evidence shows 
that evolution can happen over much more rapid timescales (such as the evolution of bacteria – 
see page 534).
 ATL A4.1A 
Explore the diversity of life on Earth using the Linnaean Society’s interactive tree of life, OneZoom: 
www.onezoom.org/linnean, which connects all species together in a spiralling structure that 
shows evolutionary history. Each leaf on the OneZoom tree represents a species and the branches 
show how they are connected through evolution.
Think of a species that is of interest to you (for example, the blue whale). Can you find this species 
on the tree of life? To which organisms is it most closely related?
	
◆Evolution: cumulative 
change in the heritable 
characteristics of a 
population.
Theme A 
Unity and diversity – Ecosystems


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.1   Evolution and speciation
139
Scientists have long appreciated that species have changed over time. Evidence from the fossil record, 
for example, makes it clear that life has changed substantially over geological history, becoming more 
complex over time but with many species now extinct. Mass extinctions have occurred in the past, 
where over 75% of species have been wiped out. In 1809, French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck 
proposed an explanation for change in species over time. His theory proposed that all the physical 
changes occurring in an individual during its lifetime can be inherited by its offspring. The theory 
influenced evolutionary thought throughout the first half of the nineteenth century.
 
■Lamarck’s theory of evolution
l	 Change through use and disuse: The organs that are used frequently by the organism develop 
and the characteristics that are used seldom are lost in the succeeding generations. For example, 
as a giraffe stretches its neck to eat leaves the neck elongates, and this is then passed on to the 
next generation. The organs that the organisms have stopped using would shrink with time. As 
the organisms adapted to their surroundings, they became increasingly complex compared to the 
simpler forms. Lamarck proposed that complexity arises due to usage or disuse of particular traits.
l	 Inheritance of acquired characters: An individual acquires certain characteristics during 
its lifetime. These characters are inherited by their offspring as well. Lamarck explained this 
with an example of a blacksmith. A blacksmith has strong arms due to the nature of their 
work. He proposed that any children a blacksmith conceives will inherit the development of 
strong muscles.
l	 Effect of environment and new needs: The environment influences all organisms. A slight 
change in the environment brings about changes in organisms. This gives rise to new needs, 
which in turn produces new structures and changes the habits of organisms.
Supposed examples of evolution by acquired characters (Lamarckism)
l	 The ancestors of the giraffe appeared similar to modern horses, with smaller necks and forelimbs 
compared to modern giraffes. Lamarckism states that the ancestors of giraffes, striving to reach 
the leaves of trees as an alternative source of food, were able to lengthen their necks. If such 
characters are inherited, the next generation of giraffes would be born with longer necks and 
would then stretch them further (Figure A4.1.1).
l	 Weightlifters acquire better-developed muscles, which can then be passed on to their offspring.
In contrast, the theory of evolution proposed by Charles Darwin (page 140 and Chapter D4.1) 
proposed that variation within a population leads to selection pressures, which enables organisms 
that are better adapted to the environment to survive and pass on this advantage to future 
generations (with reference to giraffes, see Figure A4.1.1).
Ancestral giraffes
stretched their
necks to reach
higher vegetation.
In populations of
ancestral giraffes,
some individuals
had longer necks
than others.
Giraffes with longer
necks were better
adapted to the
environment and
had more offspring,
also with longer necks.
Over generations,
the population 
evolved to have
longer necks.
The offspring
inherited the
stretched necks.
Over generations,
offspring repeatedly
inherited longer
and longer
stretched necks.
Lamarck
Darwin
 
■Figure A4.1.1 Comparing Lamarck’s and Darwin’s theories of evolution
Concept: 
Diversity
Evolution is a 
process that 
explains the great 
variety of life seen 
on Earth. Changes 
in the heritable 
characteristics 
of a population, 
combined with 
selection pressures, 
have resulted in 
diversity across all 
forms of organisms.
Link
Mass extinctions are 
covered in Chapter 
A4.2, page 162.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
140
Many years after the lives of both Lamarck and Darwin, knowledge of DNA structure and function 
led to a revolution in science’s understanding of inheritance. DNA, as the biological molecule of 
heredity, shows how genetics underpins the mechanism by which evolution takes place. It confirms 
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection, where variation in populations plays a key role. 
As we now know (but unknown to Darwin), variation is caused by random mutations in DNA 
(page 642) leading to alterations in the genetic makeup of members of a species (new alleles) which 
may confer a selective advantage. If modification of DNA code occurs in reproductive cells, these 
changes can be passed on to the next generation. 
Modern genetics shows that acquired biological characters cannot be inherited, unless they cause 
some change to the organism’s DNA or the way in which it is ‘read’. Changes in the neck of a giraffe 
during its lifetime cannot be passed on as the changes do not affect the DNA that codes for neck 
length. The giraffe evolved its long neck because offspring inherited alleles producing a slightly longer 
neck, which allowed them to reproduce faster than those who carried the alleles for shorter necks. 
Interestingly, epigenetics (see page 672) shows how environmental factors that affect the 
survivorship of parents can alter the environment in which genes operate, and that these changes 
can be inherited by offspring, leading to alteration of gene expression in the next generation. These 
changes are not, however, Lamarckian, as the changes in gene expression in offspring, although 
affected by the environment experienced by the parents, do not lead to long-term or evolutionary 
changes. Epigenetic inheritance may last for only a few generations, so it is not a stable basis for 
evolutionary change.
Evolution is therefore the development of new types of living organism from pre-existing types by 
the accumulation of genetic differences over many generations through the process of natural 
selection of chance variations. The changes that an organism acquires in its lifetime are not inherited 
and are not transmitted to its offspring. So, evolution is the process of cumulative change in the 
heritable characteristics of a population. This is an organizing principle of modern biology.
Top tip!
The modern definition of evolution is ‘change in the heritable characteristics of a population’. 
This definition helps to distinguish Darwinian evolution from Lamarckism. Acquired changes that are 
not genetic in origin are not regarded as evolution.
Nature of science: Theories
Explaining evolution by natural selection
The theory of evolution by natural selection predicts and explains a broad range of observations and 
is unlikely ever to be falsified. However, the nature of science makes it impossible to formally prove 
that it is true by correspondence. It is a pragmatic truth and is therefore referred to as a theory, 
despite all the supporting evidence.
The theory of evolution is an empirical description of reality, rather than being a mathematical 
theory that can be shown to be true through formal logic. In this way, the theory of evolution 
has the same status as, for example, the atomic theory in chemistry. It is not necessarily true, but 
it accurately describes the world. Given this, it is a mistake to think that some general scientific 
statements are scientific theories while other general scientific statements are scientific facts. All are 
just empirically true, based on measurement and observation.
	
◆Epigenetics: the 
study of heritable changes 
in gene activity that are 
not caused by changes in 
the DNA base sequences.
Concept: Unity
Darwinian evolution 
explains the origin 
of all life on Earth. 
This theory unifies 
biology by providing 
a comprehensive 
explanation for 
the pattern of 
similarities and 
differences that 
exist in all living 
organisms.
Top tip!
The key element 
of Darwinism, and 
not of Lamarckism, 
is that evolution is 
driven by differences 
between individuals 
in the population. 
In Lamarckism 
all the changes 
could be occurring 
in all individuals 
simultaneously.
1	 Compare and 
contrast Lamarck 
and Darwin's 
theories of 
evolution.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.1   Evolution and speciation
141
Evidence for evolution 
Evidence for evolution comes from many sources, including from the study of fossils, artificial 
selection in the production of domesticated breeds, studies of the comparative anatomy of groups of 
related organisms and from molecular information. We will look at some of these sources now.
 
■Evidence from base sequences in DNA or RNA and amino acid 
sequences in proteins
All living things have DNA as their genetic material, with a genetic code that is virtually universal. 
The processes of ‘reading’ the code and protein synthesis, using RNA and translation in ribosomes, 
are very similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, too. Processes such as respiration involve the same 
types of steps and similar or identical intermediates and biochemical reactions, similarly catalysed. 
ATP is the universal energy currency. Also, among the autotrophic organisms, the biochemistry of 
photosynthesis is virtually identical.
This biochemical commonality suggests a common origin for life, as the biochemical differences 
between the living things of today are limited. Some of the earliest events in the evolution of life must 
have been biochemical, and the results have been inherited widely. However, large molecules such as 
nucleic acids and the proteins they may code for are subjected to changes with time, but this change 
may be an aid to the study of evolution and genetic relatedness. It is possible to measure the relatedness 
of different groups of organism by the amount of difference between specific molecules such as DNA, 
proteins and enzyme systems. This relatedness is a function of time since particular organisms shared a 
common ancestor. In this way, sequence data give powerful evidence of common ancestry.
 
■Evidence from selective breeding of domesticated animals and 
crop plants
Selective breeding, or artificial selection, is caused by humans. It is usually a deliberate and 
planned activity. It involves identifying the largest, the best or the most useful of the progeny, and 
using them as the next generation of parents. Continuous removal of progeny showing less-desired 
features, generation by generation, leads to deliberate genetic change. Indeed, the genetic constitution 
of the population may change rapidly. Although both artificial selection and natural selection have 
different selection mechanisms (one by nature and one by humans), the generation of the variation 
on which artificial selection acts is no different from the generation of variation in natural 
populations (i.e. random, by chance mutations).
Charles Darwin started breeding pigeons because of his interest in variation in organisms 
(Figure A4.1.2). In the Origin of Species, he noted there were more than a dozen varieties of pigeon 
which, had they been presented as wild birds to an expert, would have been recognized as separate 
species. All these pigeons were descendants of the rock dove (Columba livia), a common wild bird.
rock dove (Columba livia)
from which all varieties of
pigeon have been derived
Fantail
Pouter
Jacobin
From his breeding of pigeons, Darwin noted that there were more than a dozen varieties that, had they been
presented to an ornithologist as wild birds, would have been classsified as separate species.
Concept: Unity
All living organisms 
are descended 
from a shared 
common ancestor: 
something that is 
demonstrated by 
the universality of 
the genetic code 
and similarities in 
cell structure. 
Link
Selective breeding 
(artificial selection) 
is further covered 
in Chapter D4.1,  
page 797.
	
◆Artificial selection: 
selection in breeding, 
carried out deliberately 
by humans to alter 
populations.
2	 Explain the 
key differences 
between natural 
and artificial 
selection.
 
■Figure A4.1.2 Charles 
Darwin’s observation 
of pigeon breeding


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
142
 ATL A4.1B 
Explore artificial selection in pigeons using this site:  
https://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/pigeons/pigeonetics 
In the scenarios presented in the game, can you successfully breed pigeons with the 
desired characteristics?
Darwin argued that, if so much change can be induced in so few generations, species must be able 
to evolve into other species by the gradual accumulation of small genetic changes as environmental 
conditions change – selecting some progeny and not others. By artificial selection, the plants and 
animals used by humans (such as in agriculture, transport, companionship and leisure) have been 
bred from wild organisms. The origins of artificial selection go back to the earliest developments of 
agriculture, although at that stage successful practice no doubt evolved by accident (Figures A4.1.3 
and A4.1.4).
 
■Figure A4.1.3 From wild to domesticated species, and the origins of selective breeding skills
What domestication of wild animals involves.
•	 The identification of a population of a ‘species’ as a useful source of hides, meat, etc. and learning 
how to tell these animals apart from related species. Herd animals (e.g. sheep and cattle) are 
naturally sociable, and lend themselves to this.
•	 The selective killing (culling) of the least suitable members of this herd in order to meet immediate 
needs for food and materials for living.
•	 Encouraging breeding among the docile, well-endowed members of the herd, and providing 
protection against predators and disease.
•	 Selecting from the progeny individuals with the most useful features, and making them the future 
breeding stock.
•	 Maintenance of the breeding stock during unfavourable seasons.
•	 Ultimately, the establishment of a domesticated herd, dependent on the herdspeople rather than 
living wild, leading to the possibility of trading individuals of a breeding stock with neighbouring 
herdspeople’s stocks.
Modern selective breeding has produced shorter animals 
with a woolly fleece in place of coarse hair and with muscle 
of higher fat content; many breeds have lost their horns
Soay sheep of the Outer Hebrides suggest to us 
what the earliest domesticated sheep looked like
Wild sheep or European mouflon 
(Ovis aries musimon) occur 
today on Sardinia and Corsica


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.1   Evolution and speciation
143
Wild mustard plant 
(Brassica oleracea)
 
■Figure A4.1.4 Selective breeding of wild mustard to create different types of vegetable
Variation between different domesticated animal breeds and varieties of crop plant, and between 
them and the original wild species, shows how rapidly evolutionary changes can occur.
Examples of crop improvement by selective breeding
Cereal grains are highly significant components of the human diet. Plant matter forms the bulk 
of human food intake in both developed and less-developed countries, but it is the plants of one 
family, the grasses, that we and most of our livestock depend on (Figure A4.1.5). This family includes 
cereals, which are the fruits (grain) of cultivated grass species. They are relatively easy to grow and 
the mature grains they yield are comparatively easy to store. Grains contain significant quantities of 
protein, as well as starch, as we shall see shortly. 
 
■Figure A4.1.5 Crops (cereal grasses) that have been selectively bred from wild grasses
The cereals wheat, barley and oats and rice are the most important arable crops grown by 
agricultural communities in the Northern Hemisphere. They are examples of cultivated grass plants 
adapted to temperate climates with moderate amounts of rainfall. For example, wheat grows best in 
cool springs with moderate moisture for early growth, followed by sunny summer months that are 
dry for harvesting.
Bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) arose by natural crossings of various wild wheats that occurred 
around 8000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent of the Middle East (an area that today includes parts 
of Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, northern Iraq, southern Turkey and Iran). Today, ‘winter’ 
wheat varieties are planted in the autumn and produce side shoots before lower temperatures during 
the winter months suspend growth. Winter wheat matures in early summer. ‘Spring’ wheat varieties 
are sown after winter and are adapted to a shorter growing season (but give lower yields).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
144
There are two classes of wheat varieties. Hard wheats are higher in proteins, are grown in areas of lower 
rainfall, and are used to produce bread that can be kept for longer periods. Soft wheat varieties are 
starchier and are used to make pasta and ‘French bread’. They are grown in more humid conditions.
Maize is the second most important food crop. It was probably originally domesticated in an area we 
now call Mexico. Today maize is grown all over the world, but most intensively in the USA. Modern 
varieties are hybrids – selected from the original form of wild maize (teosinte), which can still be 
found in the wild. 
Plants originally grown in the wild would have had some of these characteristics, but 
not all. Selective breeding has been undertaken over the years to achieve the quality and 
consistency required. 
Concept: Diversity
Many modern food crops have been created by artificial selection from wild ancestral 
populations. Selective breeding has enabled humanity to diversify its sources of food 
and provide sufficient yield to feed a growing population.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Develop a laboratory experiment that investigates selective breeding in plants. 
Which species will you select and how will you ensure viable repeated generations? 
You will need a species that shows genetic variability and traits that can be easily 
measured. The following site will give you some ideas:
https://fastplants.org/2018/03/15/observing-variation-fast-plants
How will you observe variation and measure selection?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
3	 Charles Darwin argued that the great variety of breeds that we have produced in 
domestication supports the concept of evolution. Outline how this is so.
4	 Dogs of the breeds known as Alsatians, Pekinese and Dachshunds are different in appearance 
yet are all classified as members of the same species. Explain how this is justified.
 
■Evidence from homologous structures
The body structures of some organisms appear fundamentally similar. For example, the limbs of 
vertebrates seem to conform to a common plan – called the pentadactyl limb (meaning ‘five 
fingered’). Scientists describe these limbs as homologous structures as they occupy similar 
positions in an organism, have a common underlying basic structure, but may have evolved different 
functions (Figure A4.1.6). The fact that limbs of vertebrates conform but show modification suggests 
these organisms share a common ancestry. From this common origin, the tetrapod vertebrates have 
diverged over a long period of time. This process is called adaptive radiation (see also page 152). 
Classification based on homologous structures is a natural classification, or phylogenetic 
classification, because it is based on similarities and differences that are due to close relationships 
between organisms because they share common ancestors, reflecting evolutionary relationships.
Top tip!
Today’s growers 
and consumers seek 
the following maize 
characteristics:
•	
plants that grow 
vigorously in the 
local environment 
(climate, soil) but are 
resistant to diseases 
and result in high-
yielding cobs
•	
crops of fairly 
standard size 
(height) and with 
cobs that are ready 
at the same time, to 
facilitate harvesting.
	
◆Homologous 
structures: similar 
structures due to 
common ancestry.
	
◆Natural 
classification: 
organisms grouped 
by as many common 
features as possible, and 
therefore likely to reflect 
evolutionary relationships.
	
◆Phylogenetic 
classification: a 
classification based on 
evolutionary relationships 
(rather than on 
appearances).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.1   Evolution and speciation
145
1
2
3
4
bat
(ﬂight)
upper arm 
 humerus
femur 
       thigh
forearm 
 radius + ulna
tibia + ﬁbula 
   lower leg
wrist 
 carpals
tarsals 
       ankle
hand/foot 
 metacarpals
 
+ phalanges
metatarsals 
        foot
+ phalanges
The pentadactyl limb as the ‘ancestral’ terrestrial
vertebrate limb plan, subsequently adapted by
modiﬁcation for different uses/habitats.
lay-out of a ‘ﬁve-ﬁngered’
(pentadactyl) limb
monkey
(grasping)
horse
(running)
whale
(swimming)
mole
(digging)
digits
5
1
2 3 4 5
1 2 3
3
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
3
4
5
4 5
forelimb
hindlimb
 
■Figure A4.1.6 Homologous structures show adaptive radiation
Convergent evolution 
We can contrast homologous structures with other structures of organisms that have similar functions 
but fundamentally different origins. Their resemblances are superficial; these are described as 
analogous structures. The wings of an insect and a bat are analogous, for example, as they look 
similar but were derived through separate evolutionary pathways. Classification based on analogous 
structures is an artificial classification. Table A4.1.1 compares analogous and homologous structures.
 
■Table A4.1.1 Analogous and homologous structures
Analogous structures
Homologous structures
resemble each other in function
are similar in fundamental structure
differ in their fundamental structure
are similar in position and development, but not 
necessarily in function
demonstrate only superficial resemblances
are similar because of common ancestry
for example, wings of birds and insects
for example, limbs of vertebrates
Convergent evolution occurs when different species evolve similar biological adaptations in 
response to similar selective pressures. This happens when species occupy similar ecological niches. 
Traits that arise through convergent evolution are referred to as analogous structures. Analogous 
features are features that have similar functions in different organisms but have different evolutionary 
origins. The similarity of function makes them look similar – such as the fins in dolphins and 
sharks, or bird and insect wings – but they are not similar either in terms of anatomy or origin 
(Figure A4.1.7).
	
◆Analogous 
structure: a feature 
with a similar function 
and superficial structural 
similarity, but different 
fundamental structure 
and evolutionary origin.
	
◆Artificial 
classification: classifying 
organisms on the basis of 
few, self-evident features. 
	
◆Convergent 
evolution: the process 
by which distantly related 
organisms independently 
evolve analogous 
traits due to similar 
selection pressures.
Link
Galápagos finches are 
also an example of 
divergent evolution, 
see Figure A4.1.15, 
page 153.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
146
Convergent evolution contrasts with evolution from a common ancestor, which is 
known as divergent evolution (Figure A4.1.7). The vertebrates and invertebrates, for 
example, share a common ancestor. Homologous structures are ones that may appear 
different but show common evolutionary origins from a common ancestor, such as the 
forelimb of a bat and the forelimb of a whale (Figure A4.1.7).
Invertebrates
Mammals
Common ancestor
Convergent evolution
Locomotion through the air (shared selection pressure)
Divergent evolution
Bat
Dolphin
swimming
forelimb of dolphin
forelimb
of bat
flight
insect wing
Vertebrates
Dragonfly
 
■Figure A4.1.7 Convergent and divergent evolution
Common mistake
Do not confuse the terms ‘homologous’ and ‘analogous’. Analogous structures are ones that 
appear the same between different, unrelated species due to similar selection pressures, whereas 
homologous structures are ones that may appear different but show common evolutionary origins 
from a common ancestor. Classification is based on homologous not analogous structures.
Convergent evolution can be observed at both the phenotypic and molecular levels (amino acid and 
DNA sequences). It is now thought that morphology and physiology often converge owing to the 
evolution of similar molecular mechanisms in independent lineages (page 146).
Most mammals have a placenta, which supports the offspring until birth. A separate group of 
mammals, the marsupials, do not have a placenta and so give birth to undeveloped offspring that 
they then need to support outside the body. Today, the marsupials are largely found in Australia. 
The placental mammals and Australian marsupials show many examples of convergent evolution. 
Animals with comparable appearances occur in both groups, due to similar selection pressures. 
	
◆Divergent evolution: occurs 
when an ancestral species splits into 
two reproductively isolated groups, 
causing each group to develop different 
traits due to their respective selective 
pressures and natural selection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.1   Evolution and speciation
147
 ATL A4.1C 
Look at the following pictures of a dolphin and a dogfish (Figure A4.1.8). Are these animals 
closely related? Which features may make you think that they are closely related? 
Then think about what you know about the groups of animals they are in – are they in fact closely 
related? Which of the two would be more closely related to a human?

 
■Figure A4.1.8 a) A dolphin and b) a dogfish 
Use these sites to help you find out the features of both animals:
Dolphins: www.dolphins-world.com
Dogfish: http://britishseafishing.co.uk/dogfish
Analyse and evaluate the information you have found out about each animal to explain the 
implications of using only physical characteristics to classify organisms.
l	 Why should features that indicate common evolutionary origin be used (such as characteristics 
that group all mammals together compared with characteristics that group all fish) rather 
than superficial physical characteristics (e.g. the similarity in appearance between dogfish and 
dolphins)? Justify your answer using scientifically supported judgements.
l	 Explain the way in which science is applied and used to address the problem of classifying 
organisms. Why is it important to use the correct method of classification?
l	 Explain why it is important to use the same method of classification throughout the 
scientific community.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
a
b
TOK
In the study of 
evolutionary history, 
do experiments 
have any part to 
play in establishing 
knowledge? If an 
experimental approach 
has a limited role, is 
the study of evolution 
a ‘science’?
Speciation by splitting of pre-existing species
For a new species to form – a process called speciation – populations of an ancestral species need to 
become separated so that different environmental factors will act on them. 
Look at the following diagrams in Figure A4.1.9.
 
■Figure A4.1.9 Beetle speciation
	
◆Speciation: the 
process by which new 
species form, where one 
species is split into two or 
more species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
148
Something has happened to separate the initial population of beetles into two isolated populations 
– in this case, a river has formed over thousands of years, but the isolation of the populations could 
equally be due to the creation of a mountain range through movement of the Earth’s plates, or some 
other barrier. The environments on either side of the barrier are different, and so there are different 
selection pressures. Again, in this example, individuals to the north of the river are given an 
advantage by having a green colouration, matching their habitat which is covered in lush vegetation; 
individuals to the south of the river are given an advantage by having a brown colour as their habitat 
is arid with more exposed earth (Figure A4.1.10).  
Going further
Today, evolutionary biologists think that a complete barrier is not necessary for 
speciation to occur. Populations in different environments can diverge, even to the 
point of becoming different species, with some exchange of genes. What is needed 
is that selection is strong enough (e.g. the two environments are different enough) to 
overcome the homogenising (i.e. making uniform or similar) effect of gene exchange. 
An example is the evolution of apple maggot flies from ancestors that infested 
hawthorn, following the introduction of apple trees to North America.
Progressive evolutionary change in a species is not speciation, 
as individuals within the population maintain the same 
gene pool and interbreed with one another. The barrier, 
by separating populations, isolates the gene pools of two 
populations so they can no longer interbreed and exchange 
genes (they become reproductively isolated). This means 
that over time, through the process of natural selection 
(see Chapter D4.1), adaptive genes are selected and others 
are lost, and so the two gene pools change and evolve. 
Eventually the two gene pools are so different that even if 
the two populations come back together (if the river dries 
up, for example) the individuals from each population 
cannot interbreed – the two populations have become 
different species.
Through the process of speciation, the number of species increases (as opposed to periods of 
extinction when the number of species decreases, see page 162). Speciation is the only way new 
species have appeared. There are different mechanisms for speciation and these will be 
explored below.
Common mistake
It is incorrect to say that speciation is ‘evolutionary change over time in a species’. Speciation is the 
splitting of a species into two or more separate species.
Common mistake
Do not confuse the term ‘speciation’ for species classification and taxonomy. Speciation is a process 
leading to the evolution of new species, whereas classification and taxonomy refer to the way in 
which species are divided into groups based on shared evolutionary origin (see page 126).
V
a
ri
a
ti
o
n
P
r
e
d
a
ti
o
n
 
b
y
 
b
ir
d
s
A
d
a
p
t
e
d
 
b
e
e
tl
e
s
 
s
u
r
v
i
v
e
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
 
■Figure A4.1.10 Predation pressures on beetles
5	 Discuss the 
factors that 
contribute to 
speciation.
Top tip!
Without a barrier, two 
populations would 
continue to mix and 
exchange genes; this 
would maintain the 
variety present in the 
initial population but 
not allow new species 
to evolve.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.1   Evolution and speciation
149
Going further
The Red Queen hypothesis
The biologist Leigh Van Valen proposed a ‘law of 
extinction’ based on the constant probability (as 
opposed to rate) of extinction in families of related 
organisms. He analysed data compiled from the 
duration of tens of thousands of genera throughout 
the fossil record. Figure A4.1.11 shows a linear 
relationship between survival time and the logarithm of 
the number of genera, suggesting that the probability 
of extinction is constant over time.
0
1
10
100
1000
50
100
150
200
survival time (millions of years)
number of genera
 
■Figure A4.1.11 The law of extinction (‘genera’, 
on y-axis, is the plural form of genus)
To explain his law of extinction, Van Valen proposed 
the Red Queen hypothesis, which describes how the 
coevolution of competing species creates a dynamic 
equilibrium in which the probability of extinction 
remains fairly constant over time. 
In an ecosystem, a species interacts not with one 
species of competitor or parasite but with many. As 
each species evolves by natural selection, it changes the 
environment of many other species. The environment 
of each species changes as other organisms evolve.
Van Valen proposed that, even in a constant physical 
environment, evolutionary change will continue 
indefinitely as each species evolves to match other 
species’ adaptations. This is an evolutionary ‘arms 
race’: as one species evolves adaptations that make it 
more competitive, its competitors experience selection 
pressures that force them to evolve to match it. Species 
that lag too far behind will become extinct.
In terms of speciation, the barrier (for example, a 
river) need not separate two physically different 
environments. Even in the same environment, two 
isolated populations will go on evolving due to the Red 
Queen process and get more and more different, to the 
point where they cannot interbreed.
The hypothesis is named after a remark made by the 
Red Queen in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking 
Glass, where she told Alice that it took all the running 
she could do to keep in the same place.
Roles of reproductive isolation and 
differential selection in speciation
A first step to speciation may be when a local population (particularly a small local population) 
becomes completely cut off in some way, such as in colonising an island. Even then, many 
generations may elapse before the composition of the gene pool has changed sufficiently to allow 
us to define a different species. However, changes in local gene pools are an early indication 
of speciation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
150
Occasionally, a population is suddenly divided into two isolated 
populations by the appearance of a barrier (Figure A4.1.12 and 
A4.1.9). Before separation, individuals shared a common gene 
pool, but after isolation disturbing processes such as natural 
selection, mutation and random genetic drift (where there is 
random fluctuations in the frequency of a particular allele in a 
population) may occur independently in both populations, 
causing them to diverge in their features and characteristics.
 
■Reproductive isolation
By definition, different species cannot interbreed and have fertile 
offspring; gene flow between them is prevented. When members 
of related populations have evolved to this point and have become 
fully reproductively isolated, we recognise them as members of 
different species. 
 
■Geographical isolation
Geographic isolation between populations occurs when barriers 
arise and restrict the movement of individuals (and their 
spores and gametes in the case of plants) between the divided 
populations. Barriers can be natural or made by humans. 
river
later
species of forest
plant or animal
river has formed
a new route
with time, (small) isolated populations of
the species may evolve into separate species
Isolation by a new, natural physical barrier
A natural habitat became divided when a river broke
its banks and took a new route.
 
■Figure A4.1.12 A geographical barrier
An example of speciation driven by geographical isolation can be seen in two species of great ape 
found in western and central Africa. Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) are found north of the Congo 
River (in two groups – central African chimpanzees towards the Atlantic coast, and a distinct group 
further east, see Figure A4.1.13). A closely related species, the bonobos (Pan paniscus) are located 
south of the river (Figure A4.1.13). The Congo River forms a barrier between the two different 
species, so that there is geographical isolation between them. 
Although chimpanzees and bonobos appear superficially similar, there are significant differences in 
the morphology and behaviour of both species (Table A4.1.2).
 
■Table A4.1.2 Differences between chimpanzees and bonobos
Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes)
Bonobo (Pan paniscus)
larger
smaller
male-dominated societies
female-dominated societies
display aggressive behaviour
display peaceful behaviour
strong and sturdy body
long legs, narrow shoulders, small head 
location: across west and central Africa; north of 
Congo River
location: Democratic Republic of the Congo; south of 
the Congo River


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A4.1   Evolution and speciation
151
Oubangi River
Atlantic Ocean
Equator
Bayoma Falls
Congo (Lualaba) River
Lukuga River
Malagarasi River
Lake Tanganyika
500km
Kinshasa
Kindu
Kasai River
Congo River
Sankuru River
Gates of Hell
Sangha River
Mayumbe Swell
Kisangani
Central African chimpanzees
Bonobos
East African chimpanzees
Falls and rapids
Altitude: 500m
 
■Figure A4.1.13 The Congo River 
is a geographical barrier which 
led to chimpanzee speciation
Scientists agree that chimpanzees and bonobos diverged from a common ancestor between 1 million 
and 2 million years ago. For many years, the established view was that the Congo River appeared 
in the Pleistocene epoch (which began around 1.5 million years ago) and separated the common 
ancestor of chimpanzees and bonobos. Different environmental conditions on either side of the river 
led to them evolving into two species. Evidence from 2015, however, suggests that the Congo River 
has acted as a geographical barrier for far longer than previously thought, at least 34 million years. 
Therefore, scientists have hypothesized that when the Congo River first formed, the ancestor of the 
bonobo did not occupy the range the species does today, but that during times when the Congo 
River’s level decreased during the Pleistocene, one or more founder populations of ancestral bonobos 
crossed the river, forming the populations from which the current day bonobo evolved.
Differences and similarities between 
sympatric and allopatric speciation
Apart from cases of instant speciation by polyploidy (see page 154), species do not generally evolve in 
a rapid way. The process is usually gradual, taking place over a long period of time. In fact, speciation 
may occur over several thousand years and, in all cases, requires ‘isolation’.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
152
As we have already seen, reproductive isolation occurs when 
two potentially compatible populations are prevented from 
interbreeding. As well as geographical isolation, this can also 
be due to the following types of isolation:
l	 Temporal isolation – this occurs when organisms produce 
gametes at different times or seasons. An example in 
animals is rainbow trout (spring) and brown trout (autumn). 
Another type of temporal isolation is when populations may 
be active at different times of the day or night.
l	 Behavioural isolation – organisms acquire distinctive 
behaviour routines, such as in courtship or mating, not 
matched by other individuals of the species.
An example of behavioural isolation is seen in the Birds 
of Paradise (Figure A4.1.14). Here, bright, glittering and 
prominently posing males seek to secure the attention of females. 
 
■Figure A4.1.14 A male Bird of Paradise (bottom) displays 
to a potential female mate (top) who looks on
Elaborate and attractive display traits have evolved because they apparently satisfy some innate 
preference in the female birds. Competition between males has led to changes in display and plumage. 
The divergence of populations to display in different ways, and to have different preferences, may 
begin with very slight preference differences that get exaggerated over time. The resulting progressive 
elaboration of plumage and performance may be at the expense of flight ability, vulnerability to the 
attention of predators and, possibly, thermoregulation. Despite this, the genetic constitution of the 
next generation is strongly influenced by the few sexually successful males in each generation. It is the 
critical female selection that follows in response that leads to isolation of populations and, ultimately, 
reproductive isolation. Courtship behaviour of this type prevents hybridization in animal species. 
Going further
Temporal and behavioural isolation are examples of ‘intrinsic isolation’ due to evolved 
features of organisms, rather than imposed from the outside (extrinsic isolation). 
The question is, was geographical isolation required for the evolution of these intrinsic 
barriers? The current view is that geographic isolation may facilitate this evolution but it 
is not essential.
We have noted above some examples of the ways populations become isolated. Reviewing these, we 
see they fall into two groups, depending on the way isolation is brought about:
l	 Isolating mechanisms that involve spatial separation, such as geographical isolation, are known 
as allopatric speciation (meaning literally ‘different country’).
l	 Isolating mechanisms that occur within the same location, such as temporal and behavioural 
isolation, are known as sympatric speciation (meaning literally ‘same country’).
Adaptive radiation as a source of biodiversity
The concept of adaptive radiation was touched on when we discussed how the pentadactyl limb 
in vertebrates is evidence for evolution (see page 145 earlier in this chapter). Another example of 
adaptive radiation is illustrated by the beaks of the finches of the Galápagos Islands (Figure A4.1.15). 
These birds mostly failed to catch Charles Darwin’s attention on his visits to the islands – the 
detailed study of these birds was undertaken later by the ornithologist David Lack.
6	 Distinguish 
between allopatric 
and sympatric 
speciation.
	
◆Allopatric 
speciation: speciation 
that occurs when two 
groups of organisms are 
spatially separated by a 
physical or geographic 
barrier, e.g. mountain 
ranges and large rivers.
	
◆Sympatric 
speciation: speciation 
that occurs without 
geographical separation. 
Groups from the same 
ancestral population 
evolve into separate 
species due to temporal 
or behavioural isolation 
that prevents individuals 
of one species from 
mating with another.
	
◆Adaptive radiation: 
the diversification of an 
ancestral species into new 
species, characterized 
by great ecological 
and morphological 
diversity, filling different 
ecological niches.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A4.1   Evolution and speciation
153
The variation in finch beak morphology is a genetically controlled characteristic. It reflects differences 
in feeding habits. The evidence the finches provided for Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural 
selection so impressed Lack that he coined the name ‘Darwin’s finches’. It has stayed with them, 
misleading though it is.
mixed
probe
and crush
probing
tip-biting
edge
crushing
mainly
animal
diet
beak action
mainly
plant
small ground
finch
Geospiza
fuliginosa
large tree
finch
Camarhynchus
psittacula
small tree
finch
Camarhynchus
parvulus
large ground
finch
Geospiza
magnirostris
medium ground
finch
Geospiza
fortis
sharp-billed
ground finch
Geospiza
difficilis
warbler
finch
Certhidea
olivacea
woodpecker
finch
Camarhynchus
pallidus
cactus
finch
Geospiza
scandens
These finches are exclusive and, hence, endemic
to the Galápagos Islands. There are 14–15
species in total all derived from a common
ancestor and living in the same, largely
undisturbed environment.
The numerous, closely related species of finch can coexist without competing and reducing the 
number of species because of the differences in their beak morphology. The Galápagos Islands 
provided a large variety of different opportunities for the ancestral finch species landing on the 
islands. These different roles, or ‘niches’ (see page 156), provided a range of different selection 
pressures which, over time, led to the variety of finch species seen on the Galápagos Islands today. 
For example, the warbler finch (Certhidea olivacea) has a different diet to the cactus finch (Geospiza 
scandens), meaning they do not compete and can coexist, thus increasing biodiversity.
Barriers to hybridization and 
sterility of interspecific hybrids
We have already seen how courtship displays can lead to sympatric speciation (page 152). 
Such displays can prevent hybridization in animal species. We have also seen how differences in 
chromosome number lead to hybrid sterility (as in the example of the mule, Chapter A3.1, page 120). 
The barriers that prevent interbreeding between closely related species occur either before 
fertilization can be attempted (pre-zygotic isolation) or after fertilization has occurred (post-zygotic 
isolation). Table A4.1.3 shows a summary of the underlying isolating mechanisms discussed in 
this section.
 
■Figure A4.1.15 
Adaptive radiation in 
Galápagos finches
Concept: 
Diversity
Adaptive radiation 
leads to the 
diversification of an 
ancestral species 
into new niches 
through the process 
of colonization and 
adaptation to local 
environments.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
154
 
■Table A4.1.3 Summary of reproductive isolating mechanisms
Pre-zygotic reproductive isolation
Post-zygotic reproductive isolation
prevention of mating due to:
•	
habitat differences that prevent meeting
•	
behavioural differences, such as different mating 
rituals
•	
temporal differences, such as being fertile at 
different times or seasons
hybrids formed are not viable and die prematurely
hybrids formed are infertile because the 
chromosomes cannot pair up in meiosis to produce 
haploid gametes
hybrids are less fertile: with each successive generation 
fewer survive, leading to them eventually all dying out
Abrupt speciation in plants by 
hybridization and polyploidy
In the examples considered up to now, speciation has been a gradual process. However, speciation 
can occur abruptly too, as we will examine next.
An abrupt change in the structure or number of chromosomes may lead to a new species. Such an 
alteration in the number of whole sets of chromosomes is known as polyploidy. Normally, adult 
body cells contain two sets of chromosomes (the ‘diploid’ condition – see page 110). Polyploidization 
is the gaining of one or more sets of chromosomes over and above the number found in diploid cells. 
Polyploids are largely restricted to plants and, indeed, polyploidy is thought to be one of the most 
important evolutionary processes in plants, especially the angiosperms (flowering plants). Some 
animals that reproduce asexually are polyploids too, but the sex determination mechanism of 
vertebrates prevents polyploidy in these animals.
There are two mechanisms by which polyploids form:
l	 a diploid gamete fuses with a haploid one, resulting in triploid offspring (‘triploid bridge’), i.e. 
forming offspring with three sets of chromosomes
l	 a diploid gamete fuses with another diploid gamete, resulting in tetraploid embryos (with four 
sets of chromosomes).
Diploid gametes can form when the spindle fails to form during meiosis (see page 656 for further 
detail of meiosis – sexual cell division), resulting in an additional set of chromosomes being present 
in the gamete. 
Polyploid organisms can be divided into two categories (see Figure A4.1.16): 
l	 An autopolyploid is the result of doubling a diploid genome.
l	 An allopolyploid is the result of two distinct genomes combining; this occurs by interspecific 
hybridization followed by either chromosome doubling or fusing of gametes, or by interspecific 
hybridization of two tetraploids.
Many crop species are polyploids, such as Triticum aestivum (wheat), Arachis hypogaea (peanut), and 
Fragaria ananassa (strawberry). Invasive species (which are found in areas outside their normal area of 
distribution – see page 172) are often polyploids too.
 ATL A4.1D 
Why would mapping the genome of wheat be important in food production? Carry out research 
to find out about how mapping can be carried out (e.g. see https://learn.genetics.utah.edu/
content/cotton/genome) and how could this be used, e.g. finding the location of genes beneficial 
to increasing yield, protecting plants against disease, and so on, to help with food production.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
	
◆Polyploidy: a process 
that results in more than 
two sets of chromosomes 
in the nuclear genome; 
also known as whole 
genome duplication 
(WGD).
Top tip!
Polyploidy causes 
speciation most 
frequently because 
a new tetraploid 
produces only infertile 
triploid offspring 
when it mates 
with either diploid 
ancestor. Triploids 
are infertile because 
the chromosomes 
cannot pair properly 
in meiosis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
A4.1   Evolution and speciation
155
The speed of invasive plant evolution, allowing them to spread and establish themselves 
throughout the world, can in part be explained by polyploidization. Interspecific 
hybridization (allopolyploidy) results in new genetic combinations that can be acted upon 
by natural selection and results in rapid evolution. Hybrids often show improved 
biological function compared to either parent species (‘hybrid vigour’) and are generally 
larger in size, more fertile and more invasive compared to the parent species. Scientists 
have shown that invasive species are more likely to be polyploid than native species, and 
the proportion of polyploids increases with more advanced invasion. 
The plant genus Persicaria (in the family Polygonaceae) shows many instances of 
allopolyploid speciation. This genus includes many important weeds. Fifteen species 
appear to be allopolyploids. One of the diploid species, Persicaria lapathifolia (pale 
smartweed, Figure A4.1.17), has been involved in at least six cases of allopolyploid 
speciation. This species is geographically and ecologically widespread, and also 
bears numerous conspicuous flowers, which may explain its ability to hybridize with 
other species. 
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How does the theory of evolution by natural selection predict and explain the unity 
and diversity of life on Earth?
2	 What counts as strong evidence in biology?
×
tetraploid
Allopolyploidy
diploid
diploid
Fusion of gametes
of different species
Autopolyploidy
tetraploid
Fusion of gametes
of the same species
diploid
 
■Figure A4.1.16 Comparing 
autopolyploidy and allopolyploidy
 
■Figure A4.1.17 Pale smartweed (Persicaria lapathifolia) 
flowering; a plant of the family Polygonaceae
