Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
156
A4.2
Conservation of biodiversity
•	 What factors are causing the sixth mass extinction of species?
•	 How can conservationists minimize the loss of biodiversity?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 A4.2.1 	 Biodiversity as the variety of life in all its forms, levels and combinations
	 A4.2.2 	 Comparisons between current number of species on Earth and past levels 
of biodiversity
	 A4.2.3 	 Causes of anthropogenic species extinction
	 A4.2.4 	 Causes of ecosystem loss
	 A4.2.5 	 Evidence for a biodiversity crisis
	 A4.2.6 	 Causes of the current biodiversity crisis
	 A4.2.7 	 Need for several approaches to conservation of biodiversity
	 A4.2.8 	 Selection of evolutionarily distinct and globally endangered species for 
conservation prioritization in the EDGE of Existence programme
Note: There is no higher-level only content in A4.2. 
Biodiversity as the variety of life in all its forms, 
levels and combinations
There are vast numbers of different types of living organism in the world – almost unlimited 
diversity, in fact. We refer to this as biodiversity, which is a contraction of the words ‘biological’ and 
‘diversity’. By biodiversity we mean ‘the total number of different species living in a defined area or 
ecosystem’. It is also applied to the incredible abundance of different types of species on Earth.
Biodiversity is the amount of biological or living diversity per unit area. It includes the concepts of 
species diversity, habitat diversity and genetic diversity:
l	 Ecosystem diversity is the range of different habitats or number of ecological niches per unit 
area in an ecosystem. For example, a woodland may contain many different habitats (e.g. river, 
soil, trees) and so have a high ecosystem diversity, whereas a desert has few (e.g. sand, occasional 
vegetation) and so has a low diversity. Conservation of ecosystem diversity usually leads to the 
conservation of species and genetic diversity. 
l	 Species diversity is the variety of species per unit area. This includes both the number of species 
present and their relative abundance.
l	 Genetic diversity is the range of genetic material present in a gene pool or population of a 
species. A large gene pool leads to high genetic diversity and a small gene pool to low genetic 
diversity. Although the term normally refers to the diversity within one species, it can also be 
used to refer to the diversity of genes in all species within an area.
Concept: 
Diversity
Biodiversity is the 
variety of life in all 
its forms, levels and 
combinations, and 
includes ecosystem 
diversity, species 
diversity and 
genetic diversity.
	
◆Biodiversity: the 
amount of biological 
or living diversity per 
unit area. It includes 
the concepts of species 
diversity, habitat diversity 
and genetic diversity.
Common 
mistake
Some students think 
that biodiversity is only 
seen in animals. This is 
incorrect – it is a term 
that can be applied to 
all living organisms.
Theme A 
Unity and diversity – Ecosystems


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
157
Richness and evenness are components of species diversity (see below). Richness is a term that 
refers to the number of a species in an area, and evenness refers to the relative abundance of each 
species (Figure A4.2.1). A community with high evenness is one that has a similar abundance of all 
species – this implies a complex ecosystem where there are many different niches that support a 
wide range of different species. In contrast, low evenness refers to a community where one or a 
handful of species dominate – this suggests lower complexity and a smaller number of potential 
niches, where a few species can dominate.
A
B
 
■Figure A4.2.1 Species richness versus species diversity. The species richness is the 
same in both ecosystems (ecosystem A and ecosystem B have three species of beetle in 
each). In ecosystem B, diversity is higher than ecosystem A because evenness is higher. 
One species dominates in ecosystem A, indicating a less-complex ecosystem
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data; processing data; interpreting results
Collect your own data to investigate the richness and evenness of the species sampled 
in your local environment. What qualitative data can you record? What issues will arise 
during data collection and how will you address these (i.e. consider safety, ethical 
and environmental issues)? How will you assess the accuracy, precision, reliability and 
validity of your data?
 
■Simpson’s reciprocal index
Diversity indices, such as Simpson’s reciprocal index, can be used to describe and compare 
communities. Diversity indices can be used to assess whether the impact of human development on 
ecosystems is sustainable or not. When comparing communities, consider the following:
l	 low diversity could indicate pollution, eutrophication or recent colonization of a site
l	 the number of species present in an area is often indicative of general patterns of biodiversity, 
although disturbed sites often have artificially increased species richness due to the mixing of 
habitats that are usually spatially separate in undisturbed sites.
Common 
mistake
‘Species richness’ is not 
the same as ‘diversity’. 
Richness is the number 
of species in an area, 
whereas the diversity 
is a measure of the 
number of species 
and their relative 
abundance.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
158
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying Simpson's reciprocal index
Species diversity refers to the number of species and their relative abundance. It can be 
calculated using diversity indices.
Species diversity can be calculated using Simpson’s reciprocal index, using the equation: 
D = N(N – 1)
∑n(n – 1)
where:
D = diversity index, N = total number of organisms of all species found, and  
n = number of individuals of a particular species.
Index values are relative to each other and not absolute, unlike measures of, say, 
temperature, which are on a fixed scale. This means that two different areas can be 
compared using the index, but a value on its own is not useful. 
Other important points to note about Simpson’s reciprocal index are:
l	 Comparisons must be made between areas containing the same type of organism in 
the same ecosystem.
l	 A high value of D suggests a stable and ancient site, where all species have similar 
abundance (or ‘evenness’, see page 157).
l	 A low value of D could suggest disturbance through, say, logging, pollution, recent 
colonization or agricultural management, where one species may dominate.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse 
Simpson’s reciprocal 
index with the 
Simpson’s index – they 
use different equations 
and are interpreted in 
different ways. This IB 
Biology course uses the 
Simpson’s reciprocal 
index (equation and 
working shown on 
this page).
Top tip!
Diverse communities 
are ones that have 
high evenness – 
each species is 
approximately equally 
abundant, indicating 
a complex ecosystem 
with lots of niches.
Analysis of the biodiversity of two communities
Below, an analysis of two habitats is carried out using Simpson’s reciprocal index of diversity. 
Table A4.2.1 contains data from two different habitats. The total number of species (‘species 
richness’) and total number of individuals is the same for each habitat. 
Calculate the diversity of habitats X and Y, and comment on the differences 
between them.
 
■Table A4.2.1 The number of species and their abundance in two habitats
Species found
Number found in habitat X
Number found in habitat Y
A
10
3
B
10
5
C
10
2
D
10
36
E
10
4
Number of species
5
5
Number of individuals
50
50
WORKED EXAMPLE


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
159
The Simpson’s reciprocal index must be calculated for each habitat. This can be done 
using a table to calculate components of the index.
 
■Table A4.2.2 Calculating the Simpson’s reciprocal index for two habitats
Species 
Number (n) found in 
habitat X 
n(n − 1) 
Number (n) found in 
habitat Y 
n(n − 1) 
A 
10 
10(9) = 90 
3 
3(2) = 6 
B 
10 
10(9) = 90 
5 
5(4) = 20 
C 
10 
10(9) = 90 
2 
2(1) = 2 
D 
10 
10(9) = 90 
36 
36(35) = 1260 
E 
10 
10(9) = 90 
4 
4(3) = 12 
Σn(n − 1)
= 450 
Σn(n − 1)
= 1300 
Species diversity for each habitat:
habitat X: D = 50(49)
450  = 2450
450  = 5.44
habitat Y: D = 50(49)
1300  = 2450
1300 = 1.88
What do these values say about each habitat?
l	 There is greater ‘evenness’ between species in habitat X. This implies more opportunity for niches 
in this habitat, due to greater resources and space.
l	 There is less competition due to non-overlapping niches in habitat X.
l	 One species does not dominate in X, reflecting greater habitat complexity.
l	 Habitat Y is less complex with fewer, or overlapping, niches. One species can dominate, leading 
to lower diversity.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying Simpson's reciprocal index
Calculate the Simpson’s reciprocal index for the data you gathered in your biodiversity 
investigation as part of your Inquiry on page 157. Ideally you will have sampled at least 
two different areas so that comparisons can be made.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding; evaluating
Use the calculation from your biodiversity study to draw conclusions about the outcome 
of your investigation. Compare your results to other similar studies – does your study 
show similar patterns and conclusions? Link the outcomes of your investigation to your 
original research question – did you confirm or disprove your hypothesis? What were 
the limitations of the experiment and what improvements could you make next time?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
160
1	 Calculate Simpson’s reciprocal index for habitat B using data from the table below.
 
■Table A4.2.3 Comparing the species diversity of five habitats
Number of individuals found in each habitat
Species found
Habitat A
Habitat B
Habitat C
Habitat D
Habitat E
Species 1
25
50
80
97
100
Species 2
25
30
10
1
0
Species 3
25
15
5
1
0
Species 4
25
5
5
1
0
Simpson’s reciprocal 
index (D)
4.13
1.37
1.04
1.00
2	 Describe and explain the differences between the habitats shown in the table.
3	 Suggest reasons for the different values of Simpson’s reciprocal index recorded in the 
different habitats.
Comparisons between current number of 
species on Earth and past levels of biodiversity
Scientists do not know how many different types of organisms exist. Millions of species have been 
discovered, named and described, but there are many more species to be discovered. Estimates of 
the number of species on Earth range from 5 to 100 million, with the scientific consensus currently 
being around 9 million species. This estimate is broken down as follows:
l	 animals: 7.77 million (12% of which are described)
l	 fungi: 0.61 million (7% of which are described)
l	 plants: 0.30 million (70% of which are described)
l	 other species: 0.07 million.
We might have expected that all different species have been discovered in the countries that 
pioneered the systematic study of plants and animals. However, this is not the case; previously 
unknown organisms are frequently found in all countries. 
Figure A4.2.2 is a representation of the relative numbers of known species that are estimated to exist 
in many of the major divisions of living things.
‘higher plants’,
– mainly the
flowering plants
insects (a class
of the arthropods)
other arthropods
(segmented animals
with an external
skeleton and jointed
limbs)
other groups of
non-vertebrates
fungi
protoctista
vertebrates
– fish, amphibians,
reptiles, birds and
mammals
Of the 1.8 million described species,
more than 50% are insects; the
higher plants, mostly flowering plants,
are the next largest group. By
contrast, only 4000 species of
mammals are known, about 0.25%
of all known species.
 
■Figure A4.2.2 The 
relative number of animal 
and plant groups


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
161
 
■Evidence from fossils
We learn something about the history of life from the evidence of fossils. Fossilization is an extremely 
rare, chance event. Predators, scavengers and bacterial action normally break down dead plant and 
animal structures before they can be fossilized. Of the relatively few fossils formed, most remain 
buried or, if they do become exposed, are overlooked or accidentally destroyed.
Nevertheless, numerous fossils have been found – and more continue to be discovered all the 
time. The various types of fossil and the steps in fossil formation by petrification are illustrated in 
Figure A4.2.3. Where it is the case that the fossil, or the rock that surrounds it, can be accurately 
dated (using radiometric dating techniques), we have good evidence of the history of life. Radiometric 
dating measures the amounts of naturally occurring radioactive substances such as carbon-14 (in 
relation to the amount of carbon-12), or the ratio of potassium-40 to argon-40.
The fossils in a rock layer (stratum) that has been accurately dated give us clues about the 
community of organisms living at a particular time in the past, although this is necessarily an 
incomplete picture. The fossil record may also suggest the sequence in which groups of species 
evolved, and the timing of the appearance of the major phyla. Evidence from fossils suggests that 
there are currently more species alive on Earth today than at any time in the past.
Fossil forms
petrification – organic matter of the dead organism is replaced by mineral ions
mould – the organic matter decays, but the space left becomes a mould, filled by mineral matter
trace – an impression of a form, such as a leaf or a footprint, made in layers that then harden 
preservation – of the intact whole organism; for example, in amber (resin exuded 
from a conifer, which then solidified) or in anaerobic, acidic peat
Steps of fossil formation by petrification
1 	dead remains of organisms may fall into a lake or sea and become buried 
in silt or sand, in anaerobic, low-temperature conditions
2 	hard parts of skeleton or lignified plant tissues may persist and become 
impregnated by silica or carbonate ions, hardening them 
3 	remains hardened in this way become compressed in layers of sedimentary rock
4 	after millions of years, upthrust may bring rocks to the surface and erosion of these rocks commences
5 	land movements may expose some fossils and a few are discovered by chance but, of 
the relatively few organisms fossilized, very few will ever be found by humans
 
■Figure A4.2.3 The process of fossilization
TOK
What knowledge is likely to always remain beyond the capabilities of science to investigate or verify?
Some scientists propose that evidence from fossils suggests that there are currently a greater 
number of species alive on Earth today than at any time in the past. Others argue that this is 
debateable. Due to the paucity of evidence from the fossil record, particularly in rocks from deep 
time, we cannot be certain whether species diversity was ever higher in the past than it is now. 
There have been five global extinction events (see page 149 ). Following a mass extinction, there 
seems consistently to have been very little biodiversity at the beginning of each geological era; this 
has subsequently evolved. In addition, not all species fossilize well, for example organisms with soft 
bodies such as jellyfish, so there would be no fossil record of these extinct species. Scientists are 
also unlikely to find all the fossils that are hidden in the Earth. Therefore, some common ancestors 
will remain beyond the ability of science to verify.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
162
	ATL A4.2A 
The dinosaurs were the dominant group of organisms on the Earth for around 180 million years. 
Then, 66 million years ago, the majority were wiped out, with only one group surviving that 
evolved into the birds. What caused the dinosaurs to go extinct? Watch the following film and 
summarize the main points in an article or poster:
www.biointeractive.org/classroom-resources/day-mesozoic-died
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Nature of science: Observations
As classification tools have evolved in taxonomy, as seen throughout Theme A, the determination of 
what a species (or genus, or kingdom) is has changed. 
In bacterial taxonomy there has been a tug of war between what are often referred to as the 
‘lumpers’ and the ‘splitters’, with the former tending to lump together similar organisms into the 
same species, while the latter splits off subgroups within species into new species.
Let’s take the example of Salmonella, a genus in the family Enterobacteriaceae, which are Gram-
negative. They are motile facultative anaerobes (meaning they are bacteria that can move and carry 
out aerobic respiration but can switch to anaerobic respiration in the absence of oxygen) and can 
cause a wide range of illnesses in both human and animals.
Originally there were over 200 species of Salmonella based on the host range, the clinical 
expression of infection, biochemical reactions and antigens of the bacterium. Then, the results from 
DNA–DNA hybridization techniques (a molecular biology technique that measures the degree of 
genetic similarity between DNA sequences) suggested all Salmonella species were highly related 
to one another and should thus be designated as one species, S. enterica, with some subspecies. 
However, the debate about the taxonomy continues with lumpers versus splitters.
There is some debate about whether it even makes sense to talk about species in bacteria at all. 
Species are fundamentally clusters of phylogeny, physical traits, gene variants, and so on. However, 
diversity in bacteria does not always cluster and, when it does, it can do so at many different levels.
Causes of anthropogenic species extinction
On Earth, there have been five mass extinctions in the past in which more than 75% of all species 
have gone extinct over an extended period (see page 139). The causes for these extinctions were 
natural – most ultimately linked to climate change, often caused by volcanic activity. The last mass 
extinction occurred 66 million years ago and was caused by the impact of an asteroid, where change 
to Earth happened instantaneously and led to the extinction of the dinosaurs. Today, scientists 
believe we are in a sixth mass extinction, this time caused by human actions rather than natural 
causes. There are many different human-related (anthropogenic) causes of species extinction, many 
of which are covered in the case studies below.  
	
◆Anthropogenic: 
relating to human activity.
Top tip!
In this section 
we will focus on 
anthropogenic causes 
of the current mass 
extinction rather than 
the non-anthropogenic 
causes of previous 
mass extinctions.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
163
 
■Case study 1: North Island giant moas
The North Island giant moa (Dinornis novaezealandiae) is one of three extinct moa in the genus 
Dinornis that were endemic to New Zealand (Figure A4.2.4). They were a group of flightless birds and 
were the second tallest of the nine moa species, measuring up to 2 metres from the ground to their 
back and up to 3 metres tall including their necks. The North Island giant moa also showed sexual 
dimorphism (differences between females and males) with adult females being much larger than 
adult males.
This species of moa lived on New Zealand’s North Island in the lowlands, 
shrublands, grasslands, dune lands and forests. It is an example of terrestrial 
megafauna, which are the large or giant animals of an area, habitat or geological 
period, extinct and/or extant (living). The population size of the giant moa 
remained stable over the past 40 000 years until the arrival of humans, the Ma¯ori, 
in New Zealand around 1280.
The giant moa, along with other moa genera, were hunted for food. All taxa in this 
genus were extinct by 1500 in New Zealand. The most important contributing 
factor was probably farming, however, since the forests were cut and burned down 
and the ground was turned into arable land.
Studies of ancient DNA from the bones of giant extinct New Zealand birds 
demonstrate that significant climate and geological environmental changes did 
not have a major impact on their populations. Ancient DNA, radiocarbon dating 
and stable dietary isotope analysis have shown that, before humans arrived, 
moa adapted to the effects of climate change on their species by tracking their 
preferred habitat as it expanded, contracted and shifted during warming and 
cooling events.
Moa were very large and as so played a major role in shaping the structure and 
composition of vegetation communities. The extinction of moa could have affected 
New Zealand’s ecosystems through altering vegetation composition and structure, 
regeneration patterns and fire frequency.
 
■Case study 2: Caribbean monk seals
The Caribbean monk seal (Neomonachus tropicalis) was declared extinct in 2008 and is an example of 
the loss of a marine species (Figure A4.2.5). At their peak abundance, this species had a widespread 
distribution throughout the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico and western Atlantic Ocean, and their 
habitat included areas around the east coast of Central America and north coast of South America. 
The Caribbean monk seal was part of a group called Pinnipedia (pinnipeds), which includes sea 
lions and walruses. They are the only pinniped species to have become extinct. Reasons for the 
seal’s extinction included being hunted for fur and meat, and oil from its blubber; being captured 
for display in museums and zoos; and overfishing activities that disturbed their habitat and reduced 
their prey species (mainly fish). They were easy to kill because of their tame and non-aggressive 
behaviour, which meant that hunters could get close to them. NOAA (National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration) Fisheries has stated it was the first species of seal to become extinct 
because of human causes.
The extinction of the monk seal had a huge knock-on effect across the Caribbean’s food web. The 
monk seal was a top predator, feeding on a variety of fish and invertebrates, so its disappearance 
allowed some species of fish to expand at the expense of others, significantly altering the 
Top tip!
Remember, you can 
use either the common 
name or the scientific 
name when referring 
to an organism.
 
■Figure A4.2.4 The North Island 
giant moa (novaezealandiae) 
Link
Food webs are 
covered in detail 
in Chapter C4.2, 
page 581; predator–
prey relationships 
are discussed in 
Chapter C4.1, 
page 574.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
164
biodiversity of the areas where the seal had been found. 
At one point there were an estimated 233  000–338  000 monk 
seals distributed among 13 colonies across the Caribbean. 
Such an extensive population could only survive because 
there was a large quantity of food available: each adult seal 
would eat approximately 245  kg of fish per year. The loss of 
historically dense monk seal colonies, and their consumption 
rates, severely impacted other species in the Caribbean 
coral reefs.
 
■Case study 3: Falkland Islands wolf
The Falkland Islands wolf (Figure A4.2.6) was the only 
native land mammal of the Falkland Islands. These remote 
South Atlantic islands, about 480 kilometres northeast of the 
southern tip of South America, were first sighted by Europeans 
in 1692. In 1833, Charles Darwin visited the islands and 
described the wolf as ‘common and tame’.
The Falkland Islands wolf is said to have lived in burrows. 
As there were no native rodents on the islands (the usual 
prey), it is probable that its diet consisted of ground-nesting 
birds (such as geese and penguins), grubs, insects and some 
seashore scavenging.
The many settlers of the islands (mainly Scottish inhabitants 
but also some French and English) considered the Falkland 
Islands wolf a threat to their sheep. A huge-scale operation of 
poisoning and shooting began with the aim of leading the 
wolf to extinction. The operation was successful very rapidly, 
assisted by the lack of forests and the tameness of the animal 
(due to the absence of predators the animal trusted humans, 
who would lure it with a piece of meat and then kill it).
The Falkland Islands wolf was not particularly threatening 
nor was it a significant predator, although the removal of a top 
predator would have had an impact on the rest of the food 
chain, for example increasing the population size of its prey.
 
■Figure A4.2.6 The Falkland Islands wolf (Dusicyon australis) 
	ATL A4.2B 
The now-extinct Falkland Islands wolf was the only native 
land mammal on the Falkland Islands. Even Charles Darwin 
was confused by the wolf: what was a large predator doing 
on a small set of islands nearly 500 kilometres away from 
South America?
Find out about the evolution of the Falkland Islands wolf 
and why such a tame predator was found on these islands. 
Here is a good starting point:  
www.nationalgeographic.com/science/article/the-origin-of-
the-friendly-wolf-that-confused-darwin
 
■Figure A4.2.5 The Caribbean monk 
seal (Neomonachus tropicalis) 
Causes of ecosystem loss
An ecosystem is defined as a community of organisms and their surroundings, the environment in 
which they live and with which they interact. A community (i.e. a group of different species living in 
an area) forms an ecosystem by its interactions with the abiotic (non-living) environment (see 
Chapter C4.1, page 579).
Disturbance and loss of ecosystems can be natural (for example, due to typhoons or volcanic 
activity), but currently is predominantly due to anthropogenic causes. 
Top tip!
We will focus on causes of ecosystem loss that are directly or indirectly anthropogenic (caused by 
humans). Remember to include case studies in your answers to strengthen them. 
	
◆Ecosystem: a 
community of organisms 
and the physical 
environment with which it 
interacts.
	
◆Community: a group 
of different species living 
in an area.
	
◆Abiotic: the non-
living components of an 
ecosystem.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
165
 
■Case study: The loss of mixed dipterocarp forests in 
South East Asia
Tropical rainforests cover only 6% of the Earth’s land surface but may contain up to 50% of all 
species. They are found in South America, Africa, India, South East Asia and Australia, close to the 
equator. The climate is warm and stable, with temperatures varying from 20 °C at night to 35 °C at 
midday, and high rainfall, with up to 2500 mm per year. The constant warm temperatures, high 
insolation (sunlight) and high rainfall lead to high levels of photosynthesis and high productivity. 
High productivity leads to high amounts of biological matter and food, which in turn leads to 
ecosystem complexity, abundant resources (such as food) and niche (the role an organism plays in its 
community) diversity. Abundant niches lead to high species richness and high biodiversity.
Tropical rainforests are vulnerable to disturbance. As they have high biodiversity, many species 
are affected when the rainforests are disturbed. Deforestation and forest degradation are caused 
principally by demands for wood (Figure A4.2.7), for land for cattle to provide beef, and for plantation 
crops including soya and biofuels (such as palm oil in South East Asia). Tropical rainforests grow on 
nutrient-poor soils that are thin and easily eroded once the forest has been cleared, which means that 
once forest is cleared and the soil eroded, it is difficult to re-establish a forest cover.
Dipterocarp trees are the main hardwood species in the tropical rainforests of South East Asia. 
More than 270 species of dipterocarp trees have been identified so far in the island of Borneo, of 
which 155 are endemic. 
In South East Asia, large areas of dipterocarp forest have been cleared to grow oil palms (Elaeis 
guineensis), see Figure A4.2.8. In Malaysia, for example, 20% of land area is now covered by oil palm 
plantations, compared with 1% in 1974. Palm oil is used in food production (for example, margarine, 
cooking oil, ice cream, ready meals, biscuits and cakes), domestic products such as detergents and 
cosmetics, and to provide biofuel. The global production of palm oil exceeds 35 million tonnes 
per year. 
 
■Figure A4.2.7 Logging activities in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo
 
■Figure A4.2.8 Oil palm trees have replaced 
tropical rainforest over large areas of Borneo
Once the original forest has been removed, natural nutrient recycling is also lost. As the soils are 
generally nutrient poor, oil palm trees require fertilizer to be applied to produce yields that return a 
reasonable profit. Fertilizers can have various negative environmental impacts (page 808). Fertilizer 
application in oil palm plantations has also been linked to increases in ground-level ozone, which 
can have detrimental effects on both humans and wildlife, and also reduces plant productivity.
The causes and effects of the loss of mixed dipterocarp forest in Borneo in South East Asia are 
summarized in Table A4.2.4.
Link
Niches are covered in 
detail in Chapter B4.2, 
page 363.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
166
 
■Table A4.2.4 The loss of dipterocarp forest in South East Asia has severe ecological impacts
Description
Borneo is the third-largest island in the world and has historically been covered by tropical rainforest – it is one of the 
oldest rainforests in the world at approximately 130 million years old.
The rainforest is dominated by dipterocarp trees: long-lived, tall, hardwood trees that are valuable timber species.
The island has high species diversity, with 15 000 plant species, 220 mammal species and 420 bird species recorded.
Around 20% of the mammal species are endemic to Borneo.
300 species of tree can be found in 1 hectare of forest.
Many species are on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List – for example orang-utan, sun 
bear and Asian elephant.
Human threats
Borneo’s rainforests have been logged commercially for export market since the 1970s, with logging accelerating in the 
1980s and 1990s.
In 1974, forest cover was estimated to be 6.4 million ha (88% of the total land area); only 4.5 million ha remained in 1985 
(i.e. a 30% reduction in 11 years).
The deforestation rate (in 2000–5) was 3.9% per annum.
At the peak of logging operations, trees were removed in large numbers (up to 100 m3 ha−1 in volume).
Conventional logging methods are not selective and cause damage to the remaining forest.
More recently, selective logging (reduced-impact logging – RIL) methods have been used. These cause less damage and 
allow faster regeneration of forest.
Since the 1990s, oil palm has been planted on cleared land (Figure A4.2.8).
One hectare of oil palm yields up to 5000 kilograms of crude palm oil.
Most oil palm plantations are owned by the state or by transnational corporations.
Consequences of
disturbance
Damage to the remaining forest is proportional to the amount of timber removed.
Heavily-logged forest using conventional methods can remove 94% more timber than in RIL sites.
Conventional logging methods severely damage forest structure, leading to an increase in light-loving, riverine (i.e., living 
or situated on the banks of a river) species such as Macaranga trees.
Changes in forest structure reduce biodiversity.
Oil palm plantations are monocultures with low species diversity.
Oil palm plantations fragment rainforest, block migration routes and remove habitats for animals.
Insecticides and herbicides are used to control insect pests and weeds, and so reduce biodiversity.
Animals such as Asian elephants and orang-utans that stray into the plantations can be illegally killed.
Without forest cover, soil is eroded, making it difficult or impossible for the original vegetation to regrow.
Loss of forest reduces transpiration from leaves, which affects local weather patterns, leading to drier areas that are more 
prone to fire.
The valuable role that the ecosystem provides through biodiversity and controlling weather patterns has been reduced.
The role of the rainforest as an economic resource (for example though ecotourism) has been reduced.
 
■Case study: The loss of the Great 
Barrier Reef
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park is 345 000 km2. It is in the 
Coral Sea, off the coast of northeast Australia (Figure A4.2.9). 
It is an important part of Indigenous Australian culture and 
spirituality. It is also a very popular destination for tourists, 
especially in the Cairns region, where it is economically 
significant. Fishing occurs in the region as well, generating 
AU$1 billion per year.
Links
The ecology of coral reefs is covered in more detail in 
Chapter B4.1, page 353, while the threats to coral reefs are 
covered in Chapter D4.3, page 832.
 
■Figure A4.2.9 A satellite image of the Great Barrier 
Reef from 2004; the coast of Queensland is on the left, 
with the reef systems clearly visible on the right


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
167
Coral reefs, like rainforests, are amazingly diverse (and for similar reasons – such as their location, 
complexity and high productivity). The Great Barrier Reef stretches 2300 kilometres along the 
Queensland coastline of northern Australia and is made up of 3000 individual reef systems. It 
is home to 1500 species of fish, 359 types of hard coral, a third of the world’s soft corals, 6 of 
the world’s 7 species of threatened marine turtle and more than 30 species of marine mammals 
including vulnerable dugongs (sea cows). In addition, there are 5000 to 8000 molluscs; thousands 
of different sponges, worms and crustaceans; 800 species of echinoderms (starfish, sea urchins) 
and 215 bird species, of which 29 are seabirds (e.g. reef herons, ospreys, pelicans, frigate birds 
and shearwaters).
The threats to this ecosystem are many and varied; the causes and effects of the loss of the coral in 
the Great Barrier Reef are summarized in Table A4.2.5.
 
■Table A4.2.5 The causes and effects of the loss of the Great Barrier Reef 
Description
The world’s largest coral reef ecosystem; with its diversity of species and habitats, it is one of the richest and most 
complex natural ecosystems on the planet.
The area the Great Barrier Reef inhabits has been exposed to many glacial cycles and first began to grow about 18 million 
years ago (although the current reef is built upon older reef platforms).
Ecological, sociopolitical and economic pressures are causing the degradation of the coral reef and, as a consequence, are 
threatening the biodiversity of the area.
The Great Barrier Reef was made a World Heritage Site in 1981.
Human threats
The fragile coral is easily damaged by divers’ fins and boat anchors. 
Although it is illegal to remove coral pieces from the country of origin, tourists still break off bits as souvenirs. 
Over-fishing disrupts the balance of species in the food chain, and there may also be accidental damage from anchors and 
pollution from boats. 
Seafloor trawling for prawns is still permitted in over half of the marine park, resulting in the unintentional capture of 
other species and the destruction of the seafloor.
Changes in land use in Australia, from low-level subsistence agriculture to large-scale farming, means the plantations 
need heavy input of fertilizers and pesticides. Run-off from the soils into the sea has caused inorganic nitrogen pollution 
to increase by 3000%. 
Combined with sewage and pollution from coastal settlements such as Cairns, there are excessive nutrients in the water 
and algal blooms occur. 
Sedimentation (leading to mud pollution) has increased by 800% due to deforestation of mangroves to make space for 
tourist developments, housing and farming. 
Climate change is also affecting the reef: increases in sea temperature cause coral bleaching (plant and algal life on the 
reef dies, so the reef loses colour) – aerial surveys in 2002 showed that almost 60 per cent of reefs were bleached to 
some degree.
Consequences of
disturbance
Available habitats for sea turtles (coral reefs and seagrass beds) are being damaged by sedimentation, nutrient run-off 
and tourist development.
Destructive fishing techniques and climate change cause reduction in population numbers.
Mass coral bleaching events occurred in 1998, 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020 caused by increased sea temperatures due to 
climate change. 
Increases in sea level and changes to sea temperatures may have a permanent effect on the Great Barrier Reef, causing 
loss in the biodiversity and ecological value of the area. 
Climate change may be causing some fish species to move away from the reef to seek waters at their preferred 
temperature. This leads to increased mortality in seabirds that prey on the fish.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
168
Evidence for a biodiversity crisis
Evidence for the current biodiversity crisis can be drawn from reports and other sources from the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). 
IPBES (https://ipbes.net) is an independent, intergovernmental body founded in 2012 by 
94 countries to strengthen the link between scientific information and policy decisions relating to 
conservation and the sustainable use of biodiversity, long-term human well-being and sustainable 
development. Although it is not a United Nations (UN) organization, the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) provides help to IPBES.
Results from reliable surveys of biodiversity in a wide a range of habitats around the world are 
required to establish current levels of biodiversity and to allow estimates of species extinction rates 
to be calculated. Such surveys may use the Simpson’s reciprocal index to compare communities 
in undisturbed and disturbed habitats (see page 157 earlier this chapter). Surveys need to be 
repeated to provide evidence of change in species richness and evenness. There are opportunities for 
contributions from both expert scientists and citizen scientists. Citizen science is scientific research 
carried out, in whole or in part, by amateur (i.e. non-professional) scientists.
There are four common features of citizen science: 
l	 anyone can participate
l	 participants use the same protocol so data can be combined and be high quality
l	 data can help professional scientists come to reliable conclusions
l	 a wide community of scientists and volunteers work together and share data to which the public, 
as well as scientists, have access.
Citizen science allows large quantities of data to be collected – more than would be possible by 
professional scientists alone. Given the scale and imminent threats posed by the current biodiversity 
crisis (the sixth mass extinction, see page 162), citizen science offers a rapid and global mechanism 
for gathering data that can be used to support the conservation of species.
Nature of science: Evidence
The role of peer review and ‘citizen science’
To be verifiable, evidence usually comes from a published 
source that has been peer-reviewed, which allows the 
methodology to be checked. Scientists must adopt sceptical 
attitudes to claims and evaluate them using evidence.
A peer review is the evaluation of work by other experts in the 
same field as the producers of the work (peers). The purpose 
is to check the quality, validity and credibility of scientific 
work; it is a form of self-regulation within the scientific 
community to maintain the scientific integrity of published 
papers. Independent verification of data analyses and scientific 
conclusions gives objectivity to a scientific paper. 
However, studies show that even after peer review, some 
articles still contain inaccuracies and demonstrate that most 
rejected papers will go on to be published somewhere else.
This review process is usually ‘blind’: the identity of the 
reviewers is not revealed to the authors by the paper’s editorial 
board, and the names of the authors may not be revealed to 
the reviewers to prevent bias. However, scientists sometimes 
choose to bypass the peer-review process and publish their 
work on non-peer-reviewed platforms, such as websites 
and magazines.
Data can also be recorded by citizens rather than scientists. 
As mentioned above, this is known as ‘citizen science’ and 
can be done by anyone from the public with an interest in the 
projects being studied.
Citizen science brings benefits but also unique methodological 
concerns. The people carrying out the research are not experts 
and so there is a danger that data are inaccurately recorded. 
However, members of the public who carry out the work 
are supported by experts and training is available, as well as 
access to scientific protocols (procedures) so that data can be 
combined from many sources and be of high quality.
Read more about citizen science here:  
https://scistarter.org/citizen-science


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
169
Causes of the current biodiversity crisis
 
■Human population growth
For most of Earth’s history, natural processes have influenced and shaped life, such as plate tectonic 
movements, ocean and atmospheric currents, and volcanic activity. More recently, one species 
– Homo sapiens – has been the dominant influence on Earth’s ecosystems. Early humans lived in 
balance with nature, as hunter-gatherers, and had little impact on their environment. Populations 
were low in number and people lived off the land.
As humanity spread out from Africa, eventually becoming 
farmers and clearing land to grow crops, the impact of 
Homo sapiens on the planet grew. The development of settled 
agriculture represents one of the most significant changes 
in human history and enabled human populations to start 
growing. This period, known as the Neolithic (‘new stone 
age’) revolution, began in the ‘fertile crescent’ in the Middle 
East about 10 000 years ago, and forever changed the way 
that humanity interacts with the environment.
In recent times, humanity’s tremendous growth in 
population, from around 2 million in the early Neolithic 
period to over 7 billion (7 × 109) today has put even more 
pressure on the Earth’s natural systems.
Following the development of agriculture, human populations became settled in growing 
communities. Over the past 10 000 years, the domestication of many species of plants and animals 
(see page 142) has occurred independently and in different ways in different parts of the world. 
Production of staple foods enabled the human population to grow. During industrial revolutions, 
increased access to energy further fuelled population growth. The world’s population doubled 
between 1804 and 1922, 1922 and 1959, 1959 and 1974. It is, therefore, taking less and less time 
for the population to double. In the twentieth century, population growth became exponential 
(exponential means increasingly rapid growth).
Other factors have contributed to an increase in human population:
l	 better healthcare
l	 more nutritious food
l	 cleaner water
l	 better sanitation.
The biggest increase in population is in less economically developed countries (LEDCs) rather than 
in more economically developed countries (MEDCs). High infant death rates increase the pressure 
on women to have more children, and in some agricultural societies parents have larger families to 
provide labour for the farm and as security for the parents in old age. Lack of access to contraception, 
through education or medical services, also leads to increased birth rates.
The impact of exponential growth is that enormous amounts of extra resources are needed to 
support growing populations (for food, housing and clothing). Human population growth is an 
overarching cause of biodiversity loss, together with other specific causes such as hunting and other 
forms of over-exploitation; urbanization; deforestation and clearance of land for agriculture with 
consequent loss of natural habitats; pollution and spread of pest and diseases; and alien invasive 
species due to global transport.
1750 
1800 
1850 
1900 
1950 
2000 
2050 
2100 2150
population (billion)
year
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Less economically 
developed 
countries (LEDCs)
Population in 2020 = 7.8 billion
More economically developed countries (MEDCs)
 
■Figure A4.2.10 Human population increase over 400 years


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
170
year
50
1963
1993
300
250
200
150
100
1983
1973
1998
spawning stock biomass
60
exploitation rate/% (amount of fishing)
55
50
45
40
35
30
level of cod fishing, exploitation rate
amount (biomass) of cod spawning (reproducing)
Key
As the amount of fishing has been reduced (since about 1990), the decline in spawning
fish has been reversed. With time, this trend may allow stocks to recover completely.
This graph shows the decline of North Sea
cod stocks as a result of overfishing.
 
■Figure A4.2.11 Overfishing of North Atlantic cod in European waters
 
■Hunting and other forms of over-exploitation
Overharvesting and hunting have led to a significant reduction in population size of many species. 
Animals are hunted for food, medicines, souvenirs, fashion and to supply the exotic pet trade. 
Overharvesting of North Atlantic cod in the 1960s and 1970s led to significant reduction in 
population numbers (Figure A4.2.11).
 
■Urbanization
Today, some 4.2 billion (4.2 × 109) people (55% of the world’s population) live in cities. It is 
predicted that by 2050, 68% of the world’s population will live in urban areas.
Urbanization refers to the increase in the proportion of people living in towns and cities. Living areas 
are built on land that was once covered by natural habitats. For example, New York was built on land 
that was a natural wetland environment: these areas were drained and filled in during the development 
of the city. With an increasing global population and the increase in the numbers of people living 
in urban centres, the trend of increasing urbanization and loss of natural ecosystems (and therefore 
biodiversity) can be expected to continue. The density of people living in cities is very high compared 
to more rural areas, so it could be argued that increasing urbanization overall provides an effective and 
efficient way of housing a rapidly growing population, compared to less-dense housing solutions.
 
■Deforestation and clearance of land for agriculture
Deforestation
Habitat loss due to deforestation is one of the major causes of biodiversity loss. This is especially 
true when biodiverse ecosystems, such as tropical rainforests, are cleared (Figure A4.2.12, and 
see page 799).
Rainforests cover only 6% of the Earth’s surface, yet may be home to 50% of all species. The climate 
in equatorial areas provides optimal conditions for photosynthesis and, therefore, the production of 
food for consumer organisms (see pages 356 and 592).
Tropical rainforests are rich in natural resources such as timber and so are vulnerable to exploitation, 
with an average of 1.5 hectares (equivalent to a football pitch) lost every 6 seconds in 2019.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
171
Conversion of land for agriculture and mining
The increase in the world’s human population from around 3 billion (3 × 109) people in the 1950s 
to over 7 billion people in 2023 (Figure A4.2.10) has led to increased demand for food. Conversion 
of land to agriculture to produce food (Figure A4.2.13) has led to further habitat loss. Nearly 40% of 
the Earth’s land surface is used for agriculture (Figure A4.2.14), with an area approximately the size 
of South America used for crop production, and even more land (3.2–3.6 × 109 hectares) being used 
to raise livestock such as cattle. 
 
■Figure A4.2.12 Bulldozer making a logging 
road in rainforest, Sabah, Borneo
 
■Figure A4.2.13 A range of crops being grown in the UK
Global land area
13.4 billion ha = 100%
Global agricultural area
5 billion ha = 37%
Global agricultural area
Pasture
3.5 billion ha = 70%
Arable land
1.4 billion ha = 30%
Food and feed
1.29 billion ha = 27%
Material use
100 million ha = 2%
Biofuels
55 million ha = 1%
Agricultural practices have led to the destruction of native habitats and replaced them with 
monocultures (i.e. crops of only one species). Monocultures represent a large loss of diversity compared 
to the native ecosystems. However, increasing awareness of this has led to the re-establishment of 
hedgerows and undisturbed corridors that encourage more natural communities to return.
Habitats can also be lost through mining activities. Mobile phones contain an essential metallic 
element (tantalum) which is obtained by mining coltan (a metallic ore that contains the elements 
niobium and tantalum). Coltan is found mainly in the eastern regions of the Democratic Republic 
of Congo – mining activities in these areas have led to extensive habitat destruction of forests that 
contain gorillas and other endangered animals.
Natural habitats have also been cleared to make way for plantation crops. Sugar cane plantations 
have replaced tropical forest ecosystems, such as mangrove in Australia, and oil palm plantations 
throughout South East Asia have led to the widespread loss of tropical forests (page 165).
 
■Figure A4.2.14 Nearly 
40% of the Earth’s surface 
is used for agriculture. 
This pie graph shows how 
agricultural land is used 
for different purposes


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
172
Some parts of the world are more intensively farmed than others (Figure A4.2.15).
Key
33%–50%
50%–67%
Less than 15%
15%–33%
67%–89%
No data
0 1500 km
N
 
■Figure A4.2.15 Agricultural land as a percentage of total land area 
 
■Pollution and the spread of disease
Pollution is the addition to an environment of a substance or agent (such as heat) by human activity, 
at a rate greater than that at which it can be rendered harmless by the environment, and which has 
an appreciable effect on the organisms in that environment. Pollution, including chemicals, litter, 
nets, plastic bags and oil spills, damages habitats and kills animals and plants, leading to the loss of 
life and reduction in population numbers of species.
Human effects on the environment cause the spread of diseases. The golden toad (Incilius periglenes) 
was a small, shiny, bright toad once common in a small region of high-altitude, cloud-covered 
tropical forests, 0.5 km by 8 km in area, above the city of Monteverde in Costa Rica. This species was 
first discovered in 1966 but was recorded as extinct by the IUCN in 2004. The last recorded sighting 
of the toad was in 1989. Possible reasons for its extinction include airborne pollution or infection by 
fungus or parasites spread by increasing global temperatures.
Small populations are particularly prone to being affected by diseases. Reduced population size leads 
to a reduced gene pool, leaving a species more prone to disease and inbreeding (for example, the 
critically endangered Asiatic cheetah in Iran).
 
■Invasive species
When humans started trading with one another between continents, many species were removed 
from their native habitats and transported vast distances into new environments where they had not 
existed before and where they would not naturally have reached. In all countries around the world, 
there are now many species of flora and fauna that are non-native to that region. Some non-native 
species were deliberately introduced, for example in the UK the rabbit was introduced from 
Normandy, France, and the buddleia (a flowering plant endemic to Asia, Africa and the Americas) 
from China. Other species may arrive in a country by accident, as unwanted colonizers. These alien 
species in many instances became invasive species when they adversely affected endemic (native) 
species by competing with them, leading to a reduction in the population of endemic species.
Link
The effects of 
pollution are 
explored in depth in 
Chapter D4.2, page 
810; how fertilizer 
use in agriculture 
leads to pollution 
is on page 808 and 
plastic pollution is on 
page 812. Atmospheric 
pollution (climate 
change) is discussed 
further in Chapter 
D4.3, page 820.
	
◆Alien species: species 
that are introduced into 
an area by human activity.
	
◆Invasive species: 
an alien species that 
has increased rapidly 
in number, having a 
negative effect on the 
environment and on 
native species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
173
Invasive species case study: Lionfish
Over the past decade the red lionfish (Pterois 
volitans), a reef fish native to the Indo-Pacific 
ocean, has become increasingly abundant in 
the Atlantic and Caribbean oceans, where it 
has not historically been found (Figure 
A4.2.16). Current distribution includes the 
Atlantic coast of the USA, the Caribbean 
coasts of Central and South America, the Gulf 
of Mexico, the Greater Antilles and the 
Leeward Islands. Scientists believe that the 
fish escaped from aquaria in Florida into US 
coastal waters and has since expanded in 
numbers due to a lack of competition and 
predation, along with abundant food supplies.
Lionfish are venomous and aggressive marine fish. They belong to the family Scorpaenidae; the 
genus to which they belong (Pterois) is characterized by red, white and black stripes (used to put off 
predators by indicating toxicity, or by breaking up body form), and elaborate pectoral and dorsal fins. 
This makes them inedible to the predators in the Atlantic and Caribbean. Lionfish have been shown 
to overpopulate reef areas and force native species to move to areas where conditions may be less 
favourable for them. They therefore pose a major potential threat to reef ecological systems on the 
east coast of the USA and the Caribbean. 
Invasive species case study: Water hyacinth 
Water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes, Figure A4.2.17) was 
introduced as an ornamental plant to the USA from South 
America in the 1880s. By the early 1960s, the floating water 
hyacinth covered more than 50 000 hectares of public lakes 
and navigable rivers. The plant grows rapidly, forming dense 
mats that can spread across water surfaces, eventually covering 
entire bodies of water. This reduces the native algae and 
plankton in the water, which are food for the native species 
of fish and other wildlife. The water hyacinth is therefore 
destroying native wetlands and waterways, reproducing very 
quickly and crowding out native species. 
Invasive species can lead to the extinction of the native species. For example, in Hawaii many 
species of endemic snail have been wiped out by habitat loss, the introduction of rats to the islands, 
and also following the deliberate introduction in 1955 of the carnivorous snail Euglandia to control 
the alien African snail. Euglandia ate not only the African snail but also the endemic snail species.
If an alien species does not have the usual limiting factors that control it in its home environment, 
such as predation, disease and competitors, it will be able to reproduce rapidly and increase in 
numbers, putting pressure on native species. 
	ATL A4.2C 
Find out about an invasive species in your local area. Where did the species come from and how 
was it introduced? How is it affecting native species? Is it possible for the invasive species to be 
removed or managed?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
 
■Figure A4.2.16 A lionfish on a coral reef
Common 
mistake
The term ‘alien species’ 
is not synonymous 
with ‘invasive species’. 
‘Alien’ refers to a 
species that has been 
introduced outside its 
natural distribution. 
‘Invasive’ means that 
a species expands 
into and modifies 
ecosystems to which it 
has been introduced. 
A species may be alien 
without being invasive.
 
■Figure A4.2.17 Water hyacinth in a Louisiana swamp


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
174
Approaches to conservation of biodiversity
Conservation, in ecological terms, means striving to ‘keep what we have’. Conservation biology is 
the scientific study of Earth’s biodiversity with the aim of protecting habitats and ecosystems, and 
therefore species, from human-made disturbances, such as deforestation and pollution.
Conservation activities aim to slow the rate of extinction caused by the knock-on effects of 
unsustainable exploitation of natural resources and to maintain biotic interactions between species.
 
■In situ conservation
In situ conservation is the conservation of species in their natural habitat. This means that 
endangered species, for example, are conserved in their native habitat. Not only are the endangered 
animals protected, but also the habitat and ecosystem in which they live, leading to the preservation 
of many other species. In situ conservation works within the boundaries of conservation areas or 
nature reserves.
In situ conservation may require active management of nature reserves or national parks. This may 
mean active clearing of overgrowth, limiting predators, controlling poaching, controlling access, 
reintroducing species that have become locally extinct and removing alien species. In addition to 
such measures, successfully protected areas also:
l	 provide vital habitat for indigenous species; this can include habitat and food for migrating 
species such as birds
l	 create community support for the area
l	 receive adequate funding and resources
l	 carry out relevant ecological research and monitoring
l	 play an important role in education
l	 are protected by legislation
l	 have policing and guarding policies
l	 give the site economic value.
The effect of biogeographic factors
Biogeographic factors affect species diversity and so need to be considered when planning 
nature reserves. 
Island biogeography theory predicts that smaller islands of habitat will contain fewer species than 
larger islands. Therefore, it is inevitable that protected areas will have lost some of the diversity seen 
in the original undisturbed ecosystem. The principles of island biogeography can be applied to the 
design of reserves (Figure A4.2.18).
 
■Table A4.2.6 Features of protected areas that are better or worse for conservation (see Figure A4.2.18)
Better
Worse
A
single large area
single small area
B
single large area
several small areas of the same total size
C
intact habitat
fragmented and disturbed habitat
D
areas connected by corridors
separated areas
E
round (= fewer edge effects)
not round (= more edge effects)
	
◆In situ conservation: 
the conservation of 
species in their natural 
habitat.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
175
corridors
isolation
edge
size
effective design
ineffective design
 
■Figure A4.2.18 Features of effective nature reserves
Nature reserves that are better for conservation have the following features.
l	 They are large, so that:
l	 they support a greater range of habitats and, therefore, greater species 
diversity
l	 there are higher population numbers of each species
l	 there is greater productivity at each trophic level, leading to longer food 
chains and greater stability
l	 they can maintain top carnivores and large mammals.
l	 They have a low perimeter to area ratio to reduce edge effects. Fewer edge 
effects mean more of the area is undisturbed. Edge conditions are very 
different to those of the interior habitat (hotter, less humid and windier), 
and so flora and fauna that are interior specialists cannot survive in edge 
conditions. The best shape for a reserve is a circle as this has the lowest 
edge to area ratio – it is better than an extended strip of land, or one that 
has an undulating edge, even if the total area is the same.
l	 If areas are divided, then fragmented areas need to be in close proximity to 
allow animals and plants to move between fragments, or there needs to be 
corridors to join fragments.
l	 Gene flow between fragmented reserves is maintained by enabling 
movement along corridors.
l	 Movement of large mammals and top carnivores between fragments is 
maintained by corridors.
Figure A4.2.19 shows how variables associated with island biogeography 
theory correlate with species richness. 
10
5
2
1
20
15
10
5
15
10
5
40
30
20
15
10
1
10
100
500
all species
forest area (ha)
short-distance migrants and permanent residents
long-distance migrants
forest-interior birds
species richness
 
■Figure A4.2.19 The theory of island 
biogeography explains species diversity


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
176
Rewilding and reclamation of degraded ecosystems
Other cases of in situ conservation involve ‘rewilding’ and reclamation of degraded ecosystems. 
Rewilding aims to restore ecosystems and reverse declines in biodiversity by allowing wildlife and 
natural processes to reclaim areas no longer under human management. It is a form of environmental 
conservation that can significantly increase biodiversity in an area. Rewilding reintroduces lost 
animal species to natural environments, such as top predators that have a significant effect on the 
food web and trophic levels in an ecosystem. For example, the US National Park Service began to 
reintroduce the grey wolf (Canis lupus) into Yellowstone National Park in the mid-1990s. This lowered 
the local elk population (Cervus canadensis) population and their overgrazing of plants. 
Rewilding has three main principles:
1	 Core habitat areas that support biodiversity are established.
2	 Connectivity: corridors of habitat connect the core areas, allowing movement of biodiversity 
between different parts of the landscape.
3	 Carnivores: top predators are needed to maintain the ecological balance of communities. 
Carnivores represent the apex predators within ecosystems whose presence and reintroduction 
within a landscape enables ecosystem restoration.
The benefits of rewilding include:
l	 Increasing storage of carbon from the atmosphere: for example, in the UK it is estimated that by 
restoring and protecting native woodland, peat bogs, heaths and grasslands (a total area of over 
6 million hectares), 47 million tonnes of CO2 per year could be captured and stored. This figure 
is more than a tenth of current UK greenhouse gas emissions. 
l	 Helping wildlife adapt to climate change: connections between different wildlife reserves 
allow animals to move and habitats to adapt as climate change leads to the northward shift of 
ecosystems (as the temperature in northern latitudes, on average, warms). This has the potential 
to save a significant number of species from climate-driven decline or extinction.
l	 Reversing biodiversity loss: rewilding allows a reversal of biodiversity decline and extinction. 
l	 Supporting economic opportunities for local people: rewilding has the potential to help 
communities grow and thrive through nature-based enterprises, production and employment 
opportunities. 
l	 Improving health and well-being: reclaimed and restored areas provide clean water, healthy soils, 
flood defences, food and unpolluted air, all of which support human health and well-being. 
It’s important that everyone has access to natural environments, especially people who live in 
urban areas.
Ecosystem restoration means preventing, halting and reversing the damage caused to degraded 
ecosystems. Efforts to restore ecosystems and species can involve active management of the land, 
for example replanting native trees to restore forest cover (Figure A4.2.20). Rewilding may involve 
reorganizing and regenerating wildness in an ecologically degraded landscape. This may modify the 
biodiversity that would have originally been present, perhaps to manage the landscape in the long 
term with maximum sustainability in a changing world (e.g. through climate change). Restoration 
ecology aims to return an ecosystem to as close to its former state as possible after a 
major disturbance.
	
◆Rewilding: a form 
of environmental 
conservation that seeks to 
reinstate natural processes 
and, where appropriate, 
missing species, allowing 
the complex interactions 
that exist in an ecosystem 
to be reinstated.
4	 Evaluate 
the particular 
challenges in 
management of a 
nature reserve that 
is maintained near 
your home, school 
or college.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
177
 
■Figure A4.2.20 Active management of the land in Scotland, UK, where exotic 
pine tree species are removed and replaced with native broadleaf trees
 
■Ex situ conservation
Ex situ conservation is the preservation of species outside their natural habitats. For animals, this 
usually takes place in zoos, which carry out captive breeding and reintroduction programmes: 
l	 a small population is obtained from the wild or from other zoos
l	 enclosures for animals are made as similar to their natural habitat as possible
l	 breeding can be assisted through artificial insemination.
Botanical gardens have a role in the ex situ conservation of plants, where both living collections and 
seed banks are used to store genetic diversity. The storage of germ plasm represents a live information 
source for all the genes in a species of plant, which can be conserved for long periods and regenerated 
whenever it is required in the future. Germ plasm conservation is the most successful method to 
conserve the genetic characteristics of endangered and commercially valuable species. 
Tissue banks store body tissue and can be used to provide material from which researchers can 
extract genomic DNA, potentially to restore endangered or even extinct organisms.
Case study: The golden lion tamarin
The golden lion tamarin (Leontopithecus rosalia, Figure A4.2.21) 
was critically endangered, but its conservation status has 
improved due to human intervention. Found in the tropical 
rainforests of Brazil, 90% of the golden lion tamarin’s original 
habitat has been cut down and the remaining forest is small and 
fragmented. The species is only found in one small area of Brazil 
and so is especially vunerable to extinction. The monkey was 
thought by some to carry human diseases, such as yellow fever 
and malaria, and so was hunted to near extinction. The loss of 
the species would have affected other species such as insects 
and small lizards, which the monkey ate, causing those species 
to become more numerous. Larger animals that preyed on the 
monkey would decrease in number. Overall, the food chains 
of the rainforest would become shorter, producing changes in 
other trophic levels and imbalances in the forest food web.
	
◆Ex situ 
conservation: the 
preservation of species 
outside their natural 
habitats.
	
◆Germ plasm: cells 
that are capable of, or are 
produced by, sexual cell 
division or fertilization, 
such as sperm, pollen and 
seeds (i.e. they contain 
the genetic material that 
is passed down from one 
generation to the next).
5 	 Outline the 
strengths and 
weaknesses of ex 
situ conservation.
 
■Figure A4.2.21 A golden lion tamarin monkey 
(Leontopithecus rosalia)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
178
Captive breeding programmes (ex situ conservation) in places such as Bristol Zoo in the UK have 
increased numbers, allowing release into the wild. There are also efforts to preserve the native forests 
of the monkey in Brazil (in situ conservation), for example at the Reserva Biológica de Poço das 
Antas, near Rio de Janeiro. Now, the numbers in the wild have increased from a low of 400 in the 
1970s to about 1000 today.
The case of the golden lion tamarin indicates how both in situ and ex situ conservation is needed to 
conserve species effectively: combining both in situ (e.g. protected areas) and ex situ (e.g. zoos and 
captive breeding) methods can be the best solution for species conservation in many instances. 
Case study: The Bengal tiger
The Bengal tiger (Panthera tigris tigris, Figure A4.2.22) is found 
mainly in India, with smaller populations in Bangladesh, 
Nepal, Bhutan and China. Although it is one of the most 
numerous subspecies of tiger, with more than 2500 left in 
the wild, the subspecies is under threat from habitat loss and 
poaching. Tiger reserves established throughout India in the 
1970s helped to stabilize numbers and are helping to protect 
the species. Mangrove forests in Bangladesh and India, known 
as the Sundarbans, are the only mangrove forests where tigers 
are found. The Sundarbans are threatened by increasing sea 
level caused by climate change. The Bengal tiger is helping to 
attract tourists to the Sundarbans and other areas, thus raising 
money for conservation.
‘Project Tiger’ was launched in India in 1972, with the joint aim of preserving areas where the tiger 
is found as well as ensuring the ongoing survival of a healthy population of tigers. Captive breeding 
of Bengal tigers is helping to maintain the genetic diversity of the species. A Bengal tiger studbook 
keeps a record of which Bengal tigers are kept in captivity and their breeding history. By avoiding 
inbreeding within populations and cross-breeding with other subspecies of tiger, the genetic integrity 
of the Bengal tiger can be maintained. 
Again, a combination of habitat protection and captive breeding is helping to conserve this important 
animal. No single approach by itself is sufficient, and different species require different measures. 
Threats to the Bengal tiger are different to those of the golden lion tamarin. The golden lion tamarin 
is endangered largely due to its restricted distribution within a small area of Brazil, while the Bengal 
tiger is endangered due to habitat loss and poaching. One species is a small primate and the other a 
big carnivore that requires large areas to hunt for prey. Each has specific ecological requirements that 
need to be protected if they are to be conserved.
EDGE of Existence programme
 
■International conventions on biodiversity
International conventions have shaped attitudes towards sustainability. The UN Conference on 
the Human Environment (Stockholm, 1972) was the first time that the international community 
met to consider global environment and development needs together. It led to the Stockholm 
Declaration, which played an essential role in setting targets and triggering action at both local and 
international levels.
 
■Figure A4.2.22 The Bengal tiger (Panthera tigris tigris) 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

A4.2   Conservation of biodiversity
179
In 1992, the UN Rio Earth Summit resulted in the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21:
l	 The Earth Summit was attended by 172 governments and set the agenda for the sustainable 
development of the Earth’s resources.
l	 The Earth Summit led to agreement on two legally binding conventions: the UN Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
l	 Both the UNCBD and UNFCCC are governed by the Conference of the Parties (CoP), which meets 
either annually or biennially to assess the success and future directions of the Convention. For 
example, CoP 15 of the CBD was held between 25 April and 8 May 2022, in Kunming, China. 
The CBD developed the ‘Vision of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity’ that ran between 2010 and 
2020. Its stated aim was: ‘By 2050, biodiversity is valued, conserved, restored and wisely used, 
maintaining ecosystem services, sustaining a healthy planet and delivering benefits essential for 
all people.’ 
A ‘post-2020 Framework’ has now been put in place which seeks to ‘bring about a transformation in 
society’s relationship with biodiversity’. Both plans highlight the need for ‘transformative change’ to 
better appreciate the value of biodiversity and to avert its loss.
 
■Phylogenetic diversity and conservation
Phylogenetic diversity is an important aspect of biodiversity, as it measures the evolutionary 
history represented by a set of species. The extinction of a species that represents an entire branch 
of the ‘tree of life’ means a significant loss of diversity, as well as the loss of an evolutionarily 
distinct species. 
A practical methodology for applying the concept of phylogenetic diversity to conservation is being 
used in the ‘EDGE lists’ produced by the Zoological Society of London (ZSL). EDGE (Evolutionarily 
Distinct and Globally Endangered) species are those which disproportionately represent threatened 
phylogenetic diversity. 
EDGE species are those that have an above-median Evolutionary Distinct (ED) score and are also 
threatened with extinction (Critically Endangered, Endangered or Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List). 
There are currently over 550 EDGE mammal species (around 10% of all species) and over 900 EDGE 
amphibian species (around 13% of all species). Potential EDGE species are those with high ED 
scores but whose conservation status is unclear.
EDGE species identified so far include mammals, amphibians, birds, corals, reptiles, gymnosperms 
(a group of plants which include conifers) and elasmobranchs (sharks, rays and skates).
EDGE species represent an opportunity to stop the loss of phylogenetic diversity. In 2012, the 
IUCN adopted a resolution that recognized the importance of conserving threatened evolutionarily 
distinct lineages. 
	ATL A4.2D 
You need to be able to understand the rationale behind focusing conservation efforts on 
evolutionarily distinct and globally endangered species (EDGE).
Find out about the EDGE programme here: www.edgeofexistence.org 
Using the EDGE programme website, research the answers to the following questions:
1	 How are priority EDGE species identified? 
2	 What is meant by ‘Evolutionarily Distinct’ (ED) species? 
3	 What is the IUCN Red List and how is this used to assess the conservation status of plant and 
animal species?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme A: Unity and diversity – Ecosystems
180
Nature of science: Global impact of science
Complex issues associated with conservation efforts
There are many arguments for preserving species and habitats. These include:
Ethical
Every species has a right to survive; we have a responsibility to safeguard resources for 
future generations.
These are very broad and can include the intrinsic value of the species or the 
utilitarian value.
Cultural
The culture of a community can determine how it interacts with the natural world; for 
example, the indigenous Khmer Dauem community in Cambodia have, through their 
customs and traditions, been protecting the critically endangered Siamese crocodile and 
endangered Asian elephant.
Economic 
Value of genetic resources for humans (e.g. improved crops). 
Commercial considerations of the natural capital (e.g. new medicines). 
Value of ecotourism (which benefits from higher levels of diversity).
Political
Governments are responsible for putting in place local conservation strategies, so 
decisions depend on which political party is in place (in democratic countries). 
Strategies that are appealing to the public are more likely to be put forward as these are 
more likely to get the party that proposes them elected.
Political tensions arise when more than one appropriate management strategy exists.
Ecological or 
environmental
Conserving rare habitats (e.g. endemic species require specific habitats).
Ecosystems with high levels of diversity are generally more stable: healthy ecosystems 
are more likely to provide ecological services (e.g. pollination, food production).
Species diversity should be preserved as it can have knock-on effects on the rest of the 
food web.
Social 
Loss of natural ecosystems can lead to loss of people’s homes, sources of livelihood 
and culture.
Areas of high biodiversity provide income for local people through tourism, for 
example, and so support social cohesion and cultural services.
Each of these issues will affect decisions on which species should be prioritized for conservation 
efforts. Because the issues are complex, they need to be debated to ensure the most effective 
conservation strategies are implemented.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 In what ways is diversity a property of life at all levels of biological organization?
2	 How does variation contribute to the stability of ecological communities? 
