B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
223
B2.1
Membranes and 
membrane transport
•	 How do molecules of lipid and protein assemble into biological membranes?
•	 What determines whether a substance can pass through a biological membrane?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B2.1.1 	
Lipid bilayers as the basis of cell membranes 
	 B2.1.2 	 Lipid bilayers as barriers 
	 B2.1.3 	 Simple diffusion across membranes 
	 B2.1.4 	 Integral and peripheral proteins in membranes 
	 B2.1.5 	 Movement of water molecules across membranes by osmosis and the role 
of aquaporins
	 B2.1.6 	 Channel proteins for facilitated diffusion
	 B2.1.7 	
Pump proteins for active transport
	 B2.1.8 	 Selectivity in membrane permeability
	 B2.1.9 	 Structure and function of glycoproteins and glycolipids
	 B2.1.10 	 Fluid mosaic model of membrane structure
	 B2.1.11 	 Relationships between fatty acid composition of lipid bilayers and their fluidity 
(HL only)
	 B2.1.12 	 Cholesterol and membrane fluidity in animal cells (HL only)
	 B2.1.13 	 Membrane fluidity and the fusion and formation of vesicles (HL only)
	 B2.1.14 	 Gated ion channels in neurons (HL only)
	 B2.1.15 	 Sodium–potassium pumps as an example of exchange transporters (HL only)
	 B2.1.16 	 Sodium-dependent glucose cotransporters as an example of indirect active 
transport (HL only)
	 B2.1.17 	 Adhesion of cells to form tissues (HL only)
The basis of cell membranes – lipid bilayers
A plasma membrane is a structure common to all cells. The plasma membrane encompasses 
and maintains the integrity of the cell (it holds the cell’s contents together). It is also a barrier 
across which all substances entering and leaving the cell must cross. The lipid of membranes is 
predominantly phospholipid, together with other lipid types. 
Phospholipid molecules in contact
with water form a monolayer, with
heads dissolved in the water and the
tails sticking outwards.
in contact with water forming
a monolayer
a phospholipid molecule has
a hydrophobic tail – which
repels water – and a
hydrophilic head – which
attracts water  
When mixed with water, phospholipid
molecules arrange themselves into a
bilayer, in which the hydrophobic
tails are attracted to each other.   
mixing with water to form a bilayer 
Link
The chemical 
structure of 
phospholipid was 
introduced in Figure 
B1.1.27 and is covered 
in detail in Chapter 
B1.1, page 202.
 
■Figure B2.1.1 The response of phospholipid 
molecules when added either to the surface 
of a water layer (left), forming monolayers, or 
mixed into water (right), forming bilayers
Theme B 
Form and function – Cells


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
224
The phosphate heads of phospholipids (which are hydrophilic) interact with the surface of the water 
whereas the tails are repelled (they are hydrophobic). On the surface of water, phospholipids form 
monolayers (i.e. a single layer). When submerged in water, phospholipids spontaneously form a 
double-layered structure, with the hydrophilic heads directed out into the water and the hydrophobic 
tails pointing away (Figure B2.1.1). Monolayers can be extensive and cover a water surface, whereas 
bilayers need to be continuous and so form closed structures, called vesicles (see Figure A2.1.5, 
page 41). 
Lipid bilayers as barriers
The lipid bilayer is about 4–10 nm in thickness and this can encompass a prokaryotic cell of 
0.1–5 µm in diameter, or a eukaryotic cell of 10–100 µm in diameter. In the lipid bilayer attractions 
between the hydrophobic hydrocarbon tails on the inside and between the hydrophilic glycerol/
phosphate heads and the surrounding water on the outside make a stable, strong barrier. 
In this way, the hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains form the core of a membrane. This part of the 
membrane has low permeability to large and hydrophilic molecules, including ions and polar 
molecules. Membranes therefore function as effective barriers between aqueous solutions, across 
which all substances entering and leaving the cell pass, such as metabolites that move between the 
cytoplasm and the interior of the cell.
 
■Crossing the lipid bilayer barrier 
The movement of molecules such as water, respiratory gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide), nutrients 
(e.g. glucose), essential ions and excretory products is continual. These molecules can go into or out 
of cells.
Cells may secrete substances such as hormones and enzymes, or they may receive growth substances 
and certain hormones. Plants secrete the chemicals that make up their walls through their cell 
membranes, and assemble and maintain the wall outside the membrane. Certain mammalian cells 
secrete structural proteins, such as collagen, in a form that can be assembled outside the cells. 
All these molecules need to move across the lipid bilayer barrier to get into or out of cells.
Figure B2.1.2 is a summary of the movement across plasma membranes, while Figure B2.1.3 
summarizes the mechanisms of transport across membranes.
cell wall components –
cellulose and hemicellulose
(assembled to make plant
cell wall, outside cell)
water
uptake/loss
H2O
respiration
nutrition
sugars,
amino acids,
fatty acids,
vitamins
ions
e.g. Na+, K+, Ca2+, also
trace elements (e.g. Fe, Cu)
excretion
NH3
urea (animals)
procollagen (assembled
into collagen fibres outside
the mammalian cell)
neurotransmitter substances,
hormones
enzymes
sites for hormones,
antigens, cell recognition
O2
CO2
receptors
secretion
1	 State the 
difference between 
a lipid bilayer 
and the double 
membrane of 
many organelles.
 
■Figure B2.1.2 
Movements across the 
plasma membrane


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
225
osmosis
diffusion of water
molecules across
a membrane
2  active transport
selective movement of substances
against a concentration gradient;
energy source = energy from metabolism
1  diffusion
movement from high to
low concentration;
energy source = kinetic
energy of molecules
3  bulk transport
transport of solids and/or
liquids by vesicles at the
plasma membrane;
energy source = energy
from metabolism
ATP as energy
currency
mitochondrion
pump in
membrane
We will now look in more detail at the different mechanisms of movement across plasma membranes 
as summarized in Figure B2.1.3.
Simple diffusion across membranes
Atoms, molecules and ions of liquids and gases undergo continuous random movements. These 
movements result in the even (homogenous) distribution of the components of a gas mixture and 
of the atoms, molecules and ions in a solution. So, for example, we are able to take a tiny random 
sample from a solution and analyse it to find the concentration of dissolved substances in the whole 
solution – because any sample has the same composition as the whole. Similarly, every breath we 
take has the same amount of oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide as the atmosphere as a whole.
Continuous, random movements of all molecules ensures complete mixing and even distribution, 
given time, in solutions and gases. 
Diffusion is the passive movement of particles from a higher to lower concentration. The term 
‘membrane diffusion’ is used to describe the movement of molecules through the phospholipid 
bilayer of membranes. Molecules such as oxygen and carbon dioxide (e.g. in the lung alveoli) are 
examples of simple diffusion across membranes. 
Oxygen and carbon dioxide are very small molecules and can diffuse through the phospholipid 
bilayer. Oxygen is supplied to cells via the circulatory system – oxygen diffuses into cells from a 
higher concentration in the blood plasma into tissue fluid, and then on into the cells where it is used 
for aerobic respiration. Carbon dioxide, produced by respiration, travels in the opposite direction.
Where a difference in concentration (concentration gradient) has arisen in a gas or liquid, random 
movements carry molecules from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration. As 
a result, the particles become evenly dispersed. The energy for diffusion is transferred from the store 
of kinetic energy of the molecules. ‘Kinetic’ means that a particle has a store of energy because it is in 
continuous motion.
Diffusion in a liquid can be illustrated by adding a crystal of a coloured mineral to distilled water. 
Even without stirring, the ions become evenly distributed throughout the water (Figure B2.1.4). 
The process takes time, especially as the solid has first to dissolve.
 
■Figure B2.1.3 
Mechanisms of movement 
across membranes
	
◆Diffusion: the free 
passage of molecules 
(and atoms and ions) from 
a region of their higher 
concentration to a region 
of lower concentration.
Link
Concentration 
gradients are defined 
and discussed 
in Chapter B3.1, 
page 275.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
226
water molecules
potassium ions and
permanganate ions
1 A crystal of potassium permanganate
(potassium manganate(VII), KMnO4)
is placed in distilled water.
2 As the ions dissolve, random
movements disperse them
through the water.
3 The ions become evenly distributed.
Random movements continue, but
there is now no net movement in
any particular direction.
 
■Figure B2.1.4 Diffusion in a liquid
Diffusion across the cell membrane occurs where:
l	 The plasma membrane is fully permeable to the solute. 
l	 The lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane is permeable to non-polar substances, including 
steroids, and also to oxygen and carbon dioxide in solution, all of which diffuse quickly via 
this route.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Plan a diffusion experiment to show the effect of concentration gradient, temperature, 
surface area or distance on the rate of diffusion. Food colouring can be used to see the 
movement of particles.
Justify the range and/or quantity of the measurements you plan to use in your investigation.
Top tip!
The term ‘diffusion’, 
when referring to 
movement across 
membranes, refers to 
movement across the 
phospholipid part of 
the membrane.
exterior of cell
interior of cell
lipid with protein
attached
integral membrane
protein
peripheral
membrane
protein
phospholipid
bilayer
peripheral
membrane
protein
 
■Figure B2.1.5 Peripheral and integral proteins of the plasma membrane
Integral and 
peripheral proteins 
in membranes
Membrane proteins have diverse structures, 
locations and functions. There are two main 
categories of protein in the cell membrane: 
integral and peripheral proteins. Peripheral 
proteins are attached to the outer surface 
of the bilayer (the outside of the cell) or the 
inner surface (facing the cell cytoplasm) 
(Figure B2.1.5). Peripheral proteins may 
shuttle between integral proteins on the 
surface of the membrane, be scaffold 
proteins to hold shape, or be receptors for 
Link
Integral proteins 
are covered in more 
detail in Chapter B1.2, 
page 216.
	
◆Peripheral protein: a 
protein that is attached to 
the surface of the bilayer.
2	 Compare and 
contrast the 
structure and 
function of 
peripheral and 
integral proteins.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
227
extracellular signals. Proteins that are embedded in one or both of the lipid layers of the membrane 
are described as integral proteins. Integral membrane proteins may act as channels for transport of 
metabolites, or be enzymes and carriers, and some may be receptors or antigens.   
Osmosis 
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion (Figure B2.1.6). It is the diffusion of water molecules across a 
membrane that is permeable to water (partially permeable). Since water makes up 70–90% of living 
cells and cell membranes are partially permeable membranes, osmosis is very important in biology. 
For example, too much or too little water in the blood creates osmotic effects, where water will either 
move into cells in the blood (too much water) causing them to burst, or move out of cells (too little 
water) by osmosis. Both can be damaging for the body.
 
■Why does osmosis happen?
Dissolved substances attract a group of polar water molecules around them (a process known as 
hydration). The forces that hold the water molecules in this way are weak chemical bonds, including 
hydrogen bonds. Therefore, the tendency for random movement by the dissolved substances and 
their surrounding water molecules is very much reduced. Organic substances such as sugars, amino 
acids, polypeptides and proteins, and inorganic ions such as Na+, K+, Cl− and NO3
− have this effect 
on the water molecules around them.
1  A bag made from dialysis
   tubing, containing a
   concentrated solution
   of sucrose.
2  The bag is lowered
    into water.
3  Water enters the bag,
    which becomes
    stretched.
distilled
water
dialysis tube with
sucrose solution
volume of the bag has
increased, due to
water uptake
water molecules
free to move about
net flow
of water
into the bag
dialysis tube – a partially
permeable membrane
water molecules
attracted to sucrose molecules
slow-moving sucrose molecules
with attached water molecules – few escape from
the bag into the surrounding water
 
■Figure B2.1.6 The process of osmosis
Link
The importance of 
osmosis in medical 
applications is 
covered further 
in Chapter D2.3, 
page 690.
	
◆Osmosis: diffusion of 
free water molecules from 
a region where they are 
more concentrated (low 
solute concentration) to a 
region where they are less 
concentrated (high solute 
concentration) across 
a partially permeable 
membrane.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
228
The more concentrated the solution (i.e. the more solute dissolved per volume of water), the greater 
the number of water molecules that are held almost stationary. In a very concentrated solution, many 
more of the water molecules have restricted movement than in a dilute solution. In pure water, all of 
the water molecules are free to move about randomly and do so.
When a solution is separated from water (or a more dilute solution) by a membrane permeable to 
water molecules (such as the plasma membrane), water molecules that are free to move tend to 
diffuse, while dissolved molecules and their groups of water molecules hardly move at all. So, there 
is a net flow (diffusion) of water from a more dilute solution into a more concentrated solution across 
the membrane. This is why the membrane is described as partially permeable.
So, osmosis is defined as the net movement of water molecules (solvent), from a region of high 
concentration of water molecules to a region of lower concentration of water molecules, across a 
selectively permeable membrane. Or, we can state that osmosis is the passive movement of water 
molecules across a partially permeable membrane, from a region of lower solute concentration to a 
region of higher solute concentration. Because the membrane is impermeable to solutes, differences 
in solute concentration cause differences in water concentration. If a solution has more solute, then 
there is less room within the solution for water and so it has a lower water concentration. Water can 
move through the membrane from a more dilute solution (a higher water concentration) to a solution 
with higher solute concentration (a lower water concentration).
Common mistake
Osmosis involves the movement of water molecules, not just ‘particles‘, from lower to higher solute 
concentration across semi permeable membranes.
Top tip!
If a solution has a higher concentration of solute, it will have a lower water 
concentration. Think of a limited volume where there is only sufficient space for 
a fixed number of molecules – if there are more solute molecules then there 
will be less ‘room’ for water. The term ‘dilute’ refers to the concentration of 
solute molecules: a low concentration of solute and high concentration of water. 
A ‘concentrated’ solution is one that has a high concentration of solute (and a 
corresponding low concentration of water).
The membrane is effectively impermeable to solutes because they are too large or 
have a charge so cannot travel through the phospholipid bilayer. This means that 
when a cell gains or loses mass, it is due to the intake or loss of water through 
osmosis, not through solute movement.
3	 When a concentrated solution 
of glucose is separated from 
a dilute solution of glucose 
by a partially permeable 
membrane, determine which 
solution will show a net gain of 
water molecules.
4	 Explain what happens to a 
fungal spore that germinates after 
landing on jam made from fruit 
and its own weight of sucrose.
 
■The role of aquaporins
There are protein-lined pores in the plasma membrane, called aquaporins, which allow water to 
pass through. Water diffusing across the plasma membrane passes via the aquaporins of the 
membrane and via tiny spaces between the phospholipid molecules. The latter occurs easily where 
the plasma membrane contains phospholipids with unsaturated hydrocarbon tails, because these 
hydrocarbon tails are spaced more widely.
Link
Osmosis is explored 
in more detail, 
including experiments 
to investigate the 
changes in plant 
tissue due to water 
movement, in Chapter 
D2.3, page 683.
	
◆Aquaporin: a water 
channel pore (protein) in a 
membrane.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
229
aquaporins provide
permanent channels
for diffusion of water
molecules
molecules of the lipid
bilayer are always on
the move, producing
tiny (short-lived)
pores that are large
enough for water
molecules to pass
through
 
■Figure B2.1.7 How polar water molecules cross the lipid bilayer
Aquaporins are involved with the reabsorption of water in the collecting ducts of the kidney (see 
Chapter D3.3, page 735).
Facilitated diffusion
In facilitated diffusion, particles of a substance that cannot diffuse across the plasma membrane 
through the phospholipid bilayer are helped across the membrane by integral proteins that span the 
membrane. In the presence of these substances, channel proteins (made of globular protein) form 
pores large enough to allow diffusion (Figure B2.1.8). Channel proteins provide hydrophilic channels 
for polar and charged molecules to pass through. These pores close again when the substance is no 
longer present (Figure B2.1.9). Polar and charged molecules, such as carbohydrates, amino acids and 
ions, cross the plasma membrane by facilitated diffusion.
channel protein for
passage through membrane
– each channel
allows one specific
substance to pass
 
■Figure B2.1.8 Channel proteins in the plasma membrane for transport of metabolites or water
The structure of these channel proteins make membranes selectively permeable, allowing specific 
ions to diffuse through when channels are open but not when they are closed. In facilitated diffusion, 
the energy is transferred from the kinetic energy store of the molecules involved, as is the case in all 
forms of diffusion because molecules are moving down their concentration gradient. Energy from 
metabolism is not required. Important examples of facilitated diffusion are the movement of ADP into 
mitochondria and the exit of ATP from mitochondria (page 248). 
globular
protein in
lipid bilayer
temporary pores in
the membrane
substance X
triggers pore
to open 
diffusion of substance X from
region of high concentration
to region of low concentration
through specific pores
 
■Figure B2.1.9 Facilitated diffusion
Top tip!
‘Facilitate’ means 
‘to help’. Facilitated 
diffusion is therefore 
diffusion with the 
help of plasma 
membrane pores.
	
◆Facilitated 
diffusion: the 
movement of particles 
from higher to lower 
concentration through 
integral proteins (carrier 
or channel proteins). 
Movement is passive.
	
◆Channel protein: a 
pore in the membrane 
that allows specific 
charged particles (e.g. 
ions) and polar substances 
(i.e. all hydrophilic 
substances) to diffuse 
through the membrane 
into or out of the cell.
Common 
mistake
Although facilitated 
diffusion uses 
transmembrane proteins, 
it does not require 
energy in the form of 
ATP. Both diffusion and 
facilitated diffusion are 
passive processes.
5	 Distinguish 
between diffusion 
and facilitated 
diffusion.
Top tip!
If movement down a 
concentration gradient 
(i.e. from a higher to 
lower concentration) 
occurs via a channel 
or carrier protein, 
this is known as 
facilitated diffusion.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
230
Active transport
We have seen that diffusion, facilitated diffusion and osmosis are due to random movements of 
molecules and occur spontaneously from high to low concentrations. However, many of the 
substances required by cells must be absorbed from a dilute external concentration and taken up 
into cells that contain a higher concentration of the substance. Uptake against a concentration 
gradient cannot occur by diffusion. Instead, it requires the transfer of energy to drive it. This type of 
uptake is known as active transport.
In active transport, metabolic energy produced by the cell, stored as ATP (energy currency – see 
below), is transferred to drive the transport of molecules and ions across cell membranes. Pump 
proteins (and some carrier proteins) use energy transferred from ATP to move specific particles 
across membranes and, therefore, these particles can be moved against a concentration gradient 
(Figure B2.1.10).
 
■Figure B2.1.10 Pump proteins 
in the plasma membrane
pump protein for
active transport
across membrane
– energy from ATP
is used selectively to
move one (or two)
specific substances
across
ADP + Pi
ATP
Active transport is a feature of most living cells. We meet examples of active transport in the gut 
where absorption occurs (page 495), in the active uptake of ions by plant roots (page 322), in the 
kidney tubules where urine is formed (page 775) and in nerve fibres where an impulse or action 
potential is propagated (page 241).
Active transport has characteristic features distinctly different from those of movement by diffusion. 
 
■1 Active transport occurs against a concentration gradient
Active transport occurs from a region of low concentration to a region of higher concentration. 
The cytoplasm of a cell normally holds reserves of valuable molecules and ions, such as nitrate ions 
in plant cells or calcium ions in muscle fibres. These useful molecules and ions do not escape; the 
cell membrane keeps them inside the cell. When more useful molecules or ions become available for 
uptake, they are actively absorbed into the cells. This happens even though the concentration outside 
the cell is lower than that inside.
 
■2 Active uptake is highly selective
For example, in a situation where potassium chloride (K+ and Cl− ions) is available to an animal cell, 
K+ ions are more likely to be absorbed, since they are needed by the cell. Where sodium nitrate (Na+ 
and NO3
− ions) is available to a plant cell, it is likely that more of the NO3
− ions will be absorbed 
than the Na+, since this reflects the metabolic needs of plant cells. Most membrane pumps are 
specific to particular molecules or ions, bringing about selective transport. If the pump molecule for a 
particular substance is not present, the substance will not be transported.
 
■3 Active transport involves pump molecules
The pump molecules pick up certain molecules or ions and transport them to the other side of the 
membrane where they are then released. Pump molecules span the lipid bilayer (Figure B2.1.11). 
Movements by the pump molecules require reaction with ATP; this reaction transfers metabolic 
energy to the process. 
	
◆Active transport:  
movement of particles 
from lower to higher 
concentration, using 
energy from ATP that 
has been created during 
respiration. Movement is 
through carrier proteins.
	
◆Pump proteins: 
proteins in plasma 
membranes that use 
energy to actively carry 
ions and/or solutes 
against a concentration 
gradient.
Top tip!
Active transport 
involves movement 
against a concentration 
gradient, using energy 
transferred from ATP. 
Protein pumps/carrier 
proteins are used, but 
not channel proteins. 
Channel proteins 
are used in passive 
transport to enable 
solutes to diffuse down 
concentration gradients.
Top tip!
Carrier proteins may 
or may not carry 
out active transport; 
protein pumps always 
use ATP energy. 
Carrier proteins, for 
example, can make use 
of the concentration 
gradient of a specific 
ion built up by 
pumps to transport 
other molecules 
actively against their 
gradient. See ‘Sodium-
dependent glucose 
cotransporters’, 
page 242, for an 
example of indirect 
active transport.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
231
The protein pumps of plasma membranes are of different types. Some transport a particular 
molecule or ion in one direction (Figure B2.1.11), while others transport two substances (like Na+ 
(aq) and K+ (aq)) in opposite directions (the sodium–potassium pump, Figure B2.1.22, page 242). 
Occasionally, two substances are transported in the same direction; for example, Na+ and glucose 
(Figure B2.1.23, page 242).
ADP and Pi released
from carrier protein,
which reverts to the
receptive shape
carrier
protein
in lipid
bilayer
1
2
3
change in
shape and
position of
carrier
protein
molecule
or ion
released
ADP + Pi
4
molecules or
ions to be
transported
into cell
carrier protein
activated by
reaction
with ATP
ATP
 
■Figure B2.1.11 
Active transport of 
a single substance
Common mistake
When writing about the factors needed for active transport, do not just say that ‘energy is needed’. 
You need to mention ATP and that ATP is produced by respiration.
6	 Samples of five plant tissue discs were incubated in dilute sodium chloride solution at 
different temperatures. The table shows the uptake of ions from the solutions after 
24 hours (arbitrary units). Comment on how absorption of sodium chloride occurs, 
giving your reasons.
Sodium ions
Chloride ions
Tissue at 5 °C
80
40
Tissue at 25 °C
160
80
 
■The role of ATP in active transport
The energy released during respiration is used to form ATP (adenosine triphosphate) from ADP 
(adenosine diphosphate) and Pi (phosphate). ATP can be regarded as a short-term form of stored 
chemical energy in cells. ATP is like a ‘charged battery’ due to the presence of a high energy 
	
◆Adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP): 
a nucleotide in every 
living cell formed in 
photosynthesis and 
respiration from ADP 
and Pi; it functions in 
metabolism as a common 
intermediate between 
energy-requiring and 
energy-yielding reactions.
	
◆Adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP): a 
nucleotide in every living 
cell made of adenosine 
and two phosphate 
groups linked in series; 
it is important in energy 
transfer reactions of 
metabolism.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
232
P–O bond, while ADP is a ‘flat battery’. Respiration is the ‘charging process’. Figure B2.1.12 shows 
the release of energy from ATP when the third phosphate bond breaks, forming ADP and Pi.
high-energy bond
inorganic
phosphate
adenine
ribose
P
P
P
adenine
ribose
+
P
P
P
energy available to do work
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
 
■Figure B2.1.12 ATP is the direct source of energy in cells
Selectivity in membrane permeability
Permeability by simple diffusion is not selective and depends only on the size and hydrophilic or 
hydrophobic properties of particles. On the other hand, facilitated diffusion and active transport 
allow selective permeability in membranes. 
Large polar molecules or charged molecules cannot pass through the hydrophobic interior of 
the membrane, whereas small non-polar molecules can. This means that, for many substances, 
movement through the phospholipid bilayer can only be controlled by altering the concentration 
gradients across the membrane; for example, the movement of oxygen can be controlled by 
monitoring breathing rate, which in turn increases or decreases movement of oxygen into the lung 
(see Chapter B3.1). The membrane itself is not selectively permeable to oxygen as it can pass through 
the phospholipid bilayer. 
Substances that are moved across the membrane using transmembrane proteins can be selectively 
transported, such as ions involved in controlling the generation of electrical impulses in nerve cells. 
Such selective transport is essential for many processes, for example the movement of minerals into 
plant roots and the absorption of nutrients in the intestine of animals. 
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Investigating the effect of temperature on plant membranes 
using colorimetry
Colorimetry is the technique that helps to determine the concentration of a solution 
having colour. Colorimeters pass light of a set colour (frequency or wavelength) through 
a transparent sample and record the absorbance of the light (Figure B2.1.13). The 
absorption of light is exponentially related to the number of molecules of the absorbing 
solute in the solution, i.e., C, solute concentration. The proportion of light passing 
through the solution is known as transmittance, T, and is calculated as the ratio of the 
emergent and incident light intensities. It is usually expressed as a percentage. The 
colorimeter has two scales:
l	 an exponential scale from zero to infinity, measuring absorbance
l	 a linear scale from 0–100, measuring (per cent) transmittance.
Top tip!
It is important to zero 
the colorimeter with 
a cuvette containing 
just water before the 
experiment begins and 
to select the colour of 
the light to match the 
colour absorbed by the 
compound.
Link
Generation of 
electrical impulses in 
nerve cells is covered 
in Chapter C2.2, 
page 469.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
233
1.32
digital display
for absorbance
transmitted light
solution absorbs light
light source
coloured filter
cuvette
light detector
 
■Figure B2.1.13 A colorimeter showing the pathway of visible light (a blue or green 
filter is used with a red solution); the colorimeter produces a beam of light of a given 
wavelength (using filters) and directs it at a sample in solution in a cuvette
For most practical purposes you should use absorbance, which is linearly related to the 
solute concentration [C].
Beetroot can be used to investigate the effect of temperature on the plasma 
membrane. The beetroot cells contain a pigment, betalain, which gives them their 
distinctive colour. The pigment is contained within the cell vacuole. Betalain from 
beetroot vacuoles appears red/purple in aqueous solution as it absorbs green 
(the complementary colour) and transmits the other wavelengths. To study the 
concentration of betalain, the colorimeter is set to measure the absorbance of green 
light via the use of a filter.
Top tip!
A cuvette is a 
straight-sided clear 
container for holding 
liquid samples in a 
colorimeter. Always use 
a clean cuvette that 
has no scratches on it. 
Insert cuvettes correctly 
as they often have only 
two transparent sides 
for the light to pass 
through.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Exploring; designing
What experiment could you carry out to investigate the effect of temperature on 
plant membranes?
Before you do the investigation, think about the following:
l	 Which part of the membrane will be affected by temperature? (Hint: what do you 
know about the effect of heat on one particular type of biological molecule that is 
found in membranes?)
l	 The vacuole of beetroot contains a purple pigment called betalain. How can you use 
this information to measure the effect of temperature?
l	 What will happen to the membrane as temperature increases? Which organelles are 
surrounded by membrane in beetroots and which of these will be affected?
l	 How will you measure the effect? What will be the independent variable and what 
will be the dependent variable?
l	 What are the control variables that you must keep the same?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
234
Structure and function of 
glycoproteins and glycolipids
The carbohydrate molecules of the membrane are relatively short-chain polysaccharides. They occur 
only on the outer surface of the plasma membrane. Some of these molecules are attached to proteins 
(glycoproteins) and some to lipids (glycolipids). Collectively, they are known as the glycocalyx 
(page 195). The various functions of glycocalyx include cell–cell recognition and the binding of cells 
into tissues (cell adhesion). The glycocalyx is highly hydrophilic and attracts large amounts of water 
to the cell’s surface. This helps the cell’s interaction with its watery environment and with the cell’s 
ability to obtain substances dissolved in the water.
The carbohydrate chains of glycoproteins and glycolipids are found on the extracellular side of 
membranes (see Figure B2.1.14, below).
Fluid mosaic model of membrane structure
As we have seen, the plasma membrane is made almost entirely of protein and lipid, together with a 
small and variable amount of carbohydrate. Figure B2.1.14 shows how these components are 
assembled into the plasma membrane. This view of the molecular structure of the plasma membrane 
is known as the fluid mosaic model. The plasma membrane is described as fluid because the 
components (lipids and proteins) are on the move, and mosaic because the proteins are scattered 
about in this pattern.
Channel proteins (Figure B2.1.14) are used to move small, charged particles such as ions and polar 
molecules across the membrane by facilitated diffusion. These proteins form hydrophilic ‘tunnels’ 
across the membrane through which the ions can pass. Other channel proteins transport water 
(these are aquaporins – see page 228).
three-dimensional view
polysaccharide
lipid
glycolipid
protein
polysaccharide
glycoprotein
lipid
bilayer
channel protein
with pore
protein on one
side of the
membrane
cholesterol
protein that traverses
the membrane, and
is exposed at both
surfaces
integral proteins –
embedded in the lipid bilayer
peripheral proteins  –
attached to surface of lipid bilayer
outside of cell
inside of cell
hydrophobic
tail
hydrophilic
head
hydrophobic tail
hydrophilic head
 
■Figure B2.1.14 The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane
Link
The role of 
glycoproteins in 
cell–cell recognition 
is covered in Chapter 
B1.1, page 195.
Concept: Form
Plasma membranes 
are made from 
lipids, proteins 
and some 
carbohydrates. The 
structure is known 
as the fluid mosaic 
model because the 
proteins can move 
about freely within 
the phospholipid 
bilayer.
	
◆Fluid mosaic model: 
the accepted view of the 
structure of the plasma 
membrane, comprising a 
phospholipid bilayer with 
proteins embedded but 
free to move about.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
235
Top tip!
Practise drawing and labelling a two-dimensional representation of the fluid mosaic model. 
Make sure to include peripheral and integral proteins, glycoproteins, phospholipids and cholesterol. 
Hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions should be indicated. 
Concept: Function
Each part of the plasma membrane has a specific function and they work together 
to create a functional membrane around cells. Phospholipids are the main structural 
component of the cell membrane and act as barriers to the passage of hydrophilic 
molecules and ions into and out of the cell. Proteins have several roles depending 
on their location and structure: transport, receptors, anchorage, cell recognition, 
intercellular joining and enzymatic activity. Carbohydrates on the outer surface are 
involved in cell recognition and cell adhesion.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
James Danielli and Hugh Davson were 
among the first scientists to propose a 
structure for the plasma membrane. 
In response to the evidence, in the 
1930s, Danielli and Davson proposed a 
membrane structure (which was revised in 
1954) in which a lipid bilayer was evenly 
coated with proteins on both surfaces. 
Pores were thought to be present in 
places in the membrane. Early electron 
micrographs of cell membranes seen in 
section appeared to support this model 
(Figure B2.1.15).
What evidence from the electron 
micrograph seemed to support their model?
Evaluating
Using your knowledge of membrane 
structure, why was the Davson–Danielli 
model of the plasma membrane falsified? 
What evidence can you use to refute 
their model?
interior of cell
plasma membrane
 
■Figure B2.1.15 TEM of the cell surface 
membrane of a red blood cell (×700 000)
TOK
The explanation of the structure of the plasma membrane has changed over the years as new 
evidence and ways of analysis have come to light. Under what circumstances is it important to learn 
about theories that were later discredited?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
236
Nature of science: Models
What is known about the composition and structure of the 
plasma membrane has built up from evidence over time. 
Studies in cell structure (cytology), cell biochemistry and cell 
behaviour (cell physiology) all contributed. The first ideas about 
a ‘membrane’ were based on the observations that:
l	 cell contents flow out when the cell surface is ruptured – a 
membrane barrier is present
l	 water-soluble compounds enter cells less readily than 
compounds that dissolve in lipids – this implies that lipids 
are a major component of the cell membrane
l	 in the presence of water (the environment of life) 
phospholipid molecules arrange themselves as a bilayer, 
with the hydrocarbon tails facing together, forming a 
stable, strong barrier.
The Davson–Danielli model of membrane structure proposed 
that membranes were composed of a phospholipid bilayer that 
lies between two layers of globular proteins. The evidence that 
seemed to support this model was an electron micrograph 
that showed two dark lines with a lighter band in between 
(Figure B2.1.15). Later, additional evidence inspired two 
cytologists (Singer and Nicolson, in 1972) to propose the fluid 
mosaic model of membrane structure.
l	 Attempts to extract the protein from plasma membranes 
indicated that, while some occurred on the external 
surfaces and were easily extracted, others were buried 
within or across the lipid bilayers. These proteins were 
more difficult to extract.
l	 Freeze-etching studies of plasma membranes confirmed 
that when a membrane is by chance split open along its 
mid-line, some proteins are seen to occur buried within or 
across the lipid bilayer (Figure B2.1.16).
l	 Experiments in which specific components of membranes 
were ‘tagged’ by reaction with marker chemicals (typically 
fluorescent dyes) showed component molecules to be 
continually on the move within membranes – a plasma 
membrane could be described as strong but ‘fluid’.
l	 Lipid bilayers contain molecules of an unusual lipid, 
cholesterol, the presence of which disturbs the close-
packing of the bulk of the phospholipids of the bilayer; the 
quantity of cholesterol present may vary with the ambient 
temperatures that cells experience.
l	 On the outer surface of the plasma membrane, antenna-
like carbohydrate molecules form complexes with some 
membrane proteins (forming glycoproteins) and lipids 
(forming glycolipids).
lipid bilayer
polysaccharides
protein
molecules
inner face of
membrane
line of fracture of
membrane shown
to the right
a Cell membrane in cross-section
b Electron micrograph of the cell
membrane (freeze-etched)
inner 
surface 
of plasma 
membrane
 
■Figure B2.1.16 Plasma membrane structure: 
evidence from freeze-etching
Common mistake
When drawing a plasma membrane, take care: on diagrams showing structure, the most common 
errors are to place particular types of proteins or cholesterol in the wrong position. Cholesterol 
should be smaller than the hydrophilic tails and should be embedded in the bilayer; peripheral 
proteins should be on the membrane surface, not partially or fully embedded.
7	 Draw a diagrammatic cross-section of the fluid mosaic membrane, using Figure B2.1.14 
to help you. Label it correctly using these terms: phospholipid bilayer, hydrophobic 
region, hydrophilic region, cholesterol, glycoprotein, integral protein, peripheral protein.
8	 Describe the role of membranes in cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
237
Relationships between fatty acid composition 
of lipid bilayers and their fluidity
There is a mixture of phospholipids in the membrane. Some phospholipids have saturated fatty acid 
tails (no double bonds between a pair of carbon atoms) and some have unsaturated fatty acid tails 
(double bonds between carbon atoms) (see Figure B1.1.22, page 199). Unsaturated fatty acids in lipid 
bilayers have lower melting points, so membranes are fluid and therefore flexible at temperatures 
experienced by a cell. Unsaturated fatty acids melt at a lower temperature because their unsaturated 
hydrocarbon tails do not pack so closely together in the way those of saturated fatty acids do (see 
page 200). An excess of unsaturated fatty acid tails makes the membrane more fluid. Saturated fatty 
acids have higher melting points and make membranes stronger at higher temperatures. 
Membrane fluidity is an important factor in membrane composition. Membranes must be sufficiently 
fluid for many of the proteins present to move about and function correctly. If the temperature of 
a membrane falls, it becomes less fluid. A point may be reached when a membrane will solidify. 
Some organisms have been found to vary the balance between saturated and unsaturated fatty acids 
(and the amount of cholesterol in their membranes – see more on cholesterol below) as ambient 
temperatures change. In this way, organisms maintain a properly functioning membrane, even at 
very low temperatures. For example, investigations into the lake sturgeon (Acipenser fulvescens), 
a North American temperate freshwater fish (also known as the rock sturgeon) have shown that 
when the temperature decreases from 16 °C to 1 °C, both mono- and polyunsaturated fatty acids 
of phospholipids significantly increase, and saturated fatty acids decrease. The lake sturgeon 
occupies some of the most northerly distributions of any sturgeon species and experiences extended 
overwintering periods. Changes to the fatty acid composition of its cell membranes allows this fish 
species to survive in these cold conditions.
A homeoviscous adaptation refers to the adaptation of the cell membrane lipid composition to 
maintain adequate membrane fluidity. When temperature decreases, the composition of 
phospholipid fatty acids is expected to become more unsaturated to be able to maintain 
homeoviscosity. Membrane lipids became more unsaturated during acclimatization to cold 
conditions, with a reverse occurring due to warmer conditions.
Cholesterol and membrane 
fluidity in animal cells
As seen in Figure B2.1.14, lipid bilayers contain another type of lipid molecule, known as 
cholesterol, in addition to phospholipids. It is an essential component of the plasma membrane of 
all cells. The position of cholesterol molecules in membranes has the effect of disturbing the close 
packing of the phospholipids, increasing the flexibility of the membrane. Cholesterol acts as a 
modulator (adjustor) of membrane fluidity, stabilizing membranes at higher temperatures and 
preventing stiffening at lower temperatures.  
In mammalian membranes, cholesterol reduces fluidity and reduces the permeability of the 
membrane to some solutes. It is a steroid, with a hydrophilic hydroxyl (–OH) group and hydrophobic 
hydrocarbon chain on either side of the carbon ring structure (Figure B2.1.17).
Cholesterol interacts with the phosphate head and fatty acid tails of the phospholipids (Figure B2.1.18).
Top tip!
Ensure you are familiar 
with an example 
of adaptations in 
membrane composition 
in relation to habitat. 
Can you find any other 
examples like the 
lake sturgeon?
	
◆Cholesterol: a 
lipid of animal plasma 
membranes; a precursor 
of the steroid hormones 
in humans, formed in the 
liver and transported in 
the blood as lipoprotein.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
238
 
■Figure B2.1.18 The interaction between 
cholesterol and the phospholipid bilayer
hydroxyl group: polar and therefore hydrophilic; attracted to the phosphate
heads of the phospholipids on the outside of the membrane
carbon rings: make
cholesterol a steroid
hydrocarbon tail: non-polar
and therefore hydrophobic;
attracted to the hydrophobic
tails of the phospholipids
Concept: Form
Cholesterol has a polar hydroxyl group, whereas the rest of the molecule is hydrophobic. 
These characteristics determine where cholesterol is located within the membrane, with 
the hydrophilic –OH group attracted to the phosphate of the phospholipid and the 
hydrophobic part to the fatty acid tails in the interior of the bilayer.
The quantity of cholesterol present varies with the ambient temperatures that cells experience.
l	 In low temperatures, the cholesterol maintains the fluidity of the membrane by forcing apart the 
phospholipids and maintaining distance between them, thereby sustaining movement between 
the components of the membrane.
l	 In higher temperatures, bonds between the cholesterol and phospholipids maintain the 
structural integrity of the membrane and prevent them from becoming too fluid, and potentially 
disintegrating.
	ATL B2.1A 
Cholesterol is essential for normal, healthy metabolism. An adult human on a low-cholesterol diet 
forms about 800 mg of cholesterol in the liver each day. However, diets high in saturated fatty 
acids often lead to abnormally high blood-cholesterol levels.
Find out the effects of cholesterol on health. Produce a poster using the information you find. 
Make sure you communicate what you have found clearly. Do the effects of cholesterol depend 
on the individual and, if so, why?
Membrane fluidity and the fusion 
and formation of vesicles
Another mechanism of transport across the plasma membrane is known as bulk transport. It occurs 
by movements of vesicles of matter (solids or liquids) across the membrane by processes known 
generally as cytosis. Uptake into a cell is called endocytosis and export out of the cell is exocytosis 
(see Figure B2.1.19).
HO
hydrophobic part
of molecule
hydrophilic part
of molecule
(polar —OH group)
 
■Figure B2.1.17 Molecular 
structure of cholesterol
	
◆Endocytosis: 
formation of vesicles as 
the plasma membrane 
pinches inward, taking 
material into the cell.
	
◆Exocytosis: vesicles 
fuse with the membrane 
and material is exported 
out of the cell.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse 
membrane fluidity 
with membrane 
permeability.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
239
The strength and flexibility of the fluid mosaic membrane make this activity possible. Energy from 
metabolism (ATP) is also required. For example, when solid matter is being taken in (phagocytosis), 
part of the plasma membrane at the point where the vesicle forms is pulled inwards, and the 
surrounding plasma membrane and cytoplasm bulge out. The solid matter then becomes enclosed in 
a small vesicle. The bulk transport of fluids is referred to as pinocytosis (Figure B2.1.19).
Vesicles are used to transport materials within cells, for example, between the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum (RER) and the Golgi apparatus, and on to the plasma membrane (Figures A2.2.22 and 
A2.2.23).
 
■Endocytosis
In the human body, there is a huge number of phagocytic cells (phagocytosis means ‘cell eating’). 
One type of phagocytic cell in humans are called macrophages. They engulf the debris of damaged 
or dying cells by endocytosis and dispose of it. For example, we break down about 2 × 1011 red 
blood cells each day. These are ingested and disposed of by macrophages, every 24 hours.
 
■Exocytosis
White blood cells that produce antibody molecules secrete them by exocytosis (page 524). Another 
example of exocytosis is the release of neurotransmitter chemicals, such as acetylcholine into the 
synaptic cleft between neurons (page 332).
nucleus
vesicle
cytoplasm
exocytosis
uptake of solid particles = phagocytosis
uptake of matter =
endocytosis
uptake of liquid = pinocytosis
 
■Figure B2.1.19 Transport by endocytosis (taking matter into cells) and exocytosis  
(matter moving out from cells via vesicles)
Common mistake
Do not confuse endocytosis and exocytosis.
l	 Endocytosis: formation of vesicles as the plasma membrane pinches inwards, taking material 
into the cell.
l	 Exocytosis: vesicles fuse with the membrane and material is exported out of the cell.
Gated ion channels in neurons
We will be investigating how nerves work later; you can see the structure of a nerve cell and its 
axon in Figure C2.2.2 (page 469). For the moment, we can note that a nerve impulse is transmitted 
along the axon of a nerve cell by a momentary reversal in electrical potential difference in the axon 
membrane, brought about by rapid movements of sodium and potassium ions. The ions pass by 
Top tip!
The word ‘vesicle’ 
should be used for 
the structure formed 
by the membrane in 
endocytosis. Similarly, 
in exocytosis it is 
vesicles that fuse with 
the membrane.
Top tip!
To help remember the 
differences between 
exocytosis and 
endocytosis, think of 
exocytosis as like ‘exit’ 
and endo as like ‘into’.
9	 State an example 
of endocytosis and 
exocytosis in the 
human body.
10	Distinguish 
between 
endocytosis and 
exocytosis.
Concept: 
Function
The fluidity of the 
membrane allows 
vesicles to readily 
form and fuse with 
organelles within the 
cell. It also allows the 
import and export  
of substances via 
endo-and exocytosis. 
Link
Neurons and neural 
definitions are 
covered in Chapter 
C2.2, page 467.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
240
facilitated diffusion via pores in the membrane called gated ion channels. These pores are channel 
proteins that span the membrane (Figure B2.1.14). They have a central channel that can open and 
close. The channels are exclusively permeable for one type of ion. Because they are activated by 
reversal in electrical potential, they are called voltage-gated channels. Other channels are activated 
when a neurotransmitter binds to receptors on their surface: these are known as neurotransmitter-
gated ion channels (see below).
 
■Neurotransmitter-gated ion channels
Synapses are small gaps between neurons. The action potential carried by the neuron cannot cross 
the synapse, and so the message must be transduced (changed) from an electrical signal into a 
chemical signal, which can diffuse across the synapse. Neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine 
(ACh), are the group of chemicals that cross the synapse in this way. 
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor protein contains binding sites for acetylcholine. These receptor 
proteins are found in the central and peripheral nervous system, muscle, and many other tissues of 
many organisms.
Nicotinic receptors are ionotropic: when acetylcholine binds to the receptor, ions can flow through 
the transmembrane protein channel. The receptor acts as a channel for positively charged ions, 
mainly sodium. These ion channels can be closed, or ‘gated’, and opened by the neurotransmitter 
ACh, so they are known as neurotransmitter-gated ion channels.
Na+
Na+
cytoplasm
synaptic cleft
post-synaptic
membrane
acetylcholine
closed ion
channel
open ion
channel
nicotinic
acetylcholine
receptor
synthesis / degradation
Na+
open
standby
standby
regeneration
nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor protein 
 
■Figure B2.1.20 Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are an example of a neurotransmitter-gated ion channel 
 
■Voltage-gated channels
Potassium and sodium channels in cell membranes are voltage-gated channels. This means that 
they open or close depending on a certain threshold membrane potential being reached. 
	
◆Neurotransmitter-
gated ion channel: 
channel protein that 
temporarily opens when a 
specific neurotransmitter 
bonds with it.
	ATL B2.1B 
Nicotinic receptors also 
respond to drugs such 
as nicotine, which is 
found in cigarettes and 
vapes. What effect 
does nicotine have on 
the body, and why 
do people become 
addicted to nicotine?
	
◆Voltage-gated 
channels: a type of 
transmembrane protein 
that forms ion channels 
that are activated by 
changes in the electrical 
membrane potential of a 
neuron.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
241
When a stimulus is received by a receptor, the sodium channels open and let sodium ions into the 
inside of the axon. This depolarizes the interior of the axon, so the membrane potential goes from 
−70 mV to +40 mV. This initiates the nerve impulse, or ‘action potential’.
Almost immediately after an impulse has passed, there are relatively more positive charges inside the 
axon and the potassium channels open. The sodium channels close. Now potassium ions can exit 
the axon down an electrochemical gradient into the tissue fluid outside the nerve cell. 
Then, as the interior of the axon starts to become less positive again, the potassium channel is closed, 
first by action of a ‘ball and chain’ device (Figure B2.1.21). The ‘chain’ is believed to be a flexible strand 
of amino acid residues and the ‘ball’ is globular protein. Finally, when the axon has more positive 
charge outside than inside, the potassium channel itself returns to the fully closed condition.
K+ ions
outside
inside
lipid
bilayer
+ + +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
– –
–
– –
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+ + +
+ + +
–
–
–
–
+ + +
–
–
–
–
–
+ + +
Voltage-gated K+ channels have positively 
charged voltage-sensing paddles which are 
normally attracted to the negatively charged 
interior surface of the resting axon. In this 
position the channel is closed mechanically 
– no K+ ions pass.
Once the membrane has depolarized, the 
paddles are attracted to the outside of the 
axon membrane and repelled by the 
positively charged interior. In this position 
the selective channel gates are opened, and 
potassium ions diffuse down an electro-
chemical gradient.
A ‘ball and chain’ attached to the interior of 
the channel protein fits inside the open 
channel (the flexible chain allows this) and 
stops diffusion of K+ ions while the exterior 
of the axon is still negatively charged. The 
ball remains in place until the interior of the 
axon becomes negatively charged again and 
the gate itself is closed.
net negative charge outside 
the axon and a net positive 
charge inside the axon
net negative charge inside 
the axon and a net positive 
charge outside the axon
 
■Figure B2.1.21 Voltage-gated K+ 
channel – facilitated diffusion in an axon
Exchange transporters
Sodium–potassium pumps are globular proteins that span the axon membrane of nerve cells. They 
are an example of exchange transporters. When preparing the axon for the passage of the next nerve 
impulse, there is active transport of potassium (K+) ions in across the axon membrane and sodium 
(Na+) ions out across the membrane. This activity of the Na+/K+ pump involves a transfer of energy 
from ATP. The outcome is that potassium and sodium ions gradually concentrate on opposite sides of 
the membrane. These pumps therefore play an important role in generating membrane potentials.
The steps to the cyclic action of these pumps are:
l	 with the interior surface of the pump open to the interior of the axon, three sodium ions are 
loaded by attaching to specific binding sites
l	 reaction of the globular protein with ATP now occurs, resulting in the attachment of a phosphate 
group to the pump protein; this triggers the pump protein to close to the interior of the axon and 
open to the exterior
l	 the three sodium ions are now released and, simultaneously, two potassium ions are loaded by 
attaching to specific binding sites
l	 with the potassium ions loaded, the phosphate group detaches; this triggers a reversal of the shape 
of the pump protein – it now opens to the interior, again, and the potassium ions are released
l	 the cycle is then repeated.
11	Define the terms 
voltage-gated 
channel and 
neurotransmitter-
gated ion channel.
12	Compare and 
contrast voltage-
gated channels and 
neurotransmitter-
gated ion channels.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
242
 
■Figure B2.1.22 The sodium–potassium ion pump
ATP
ADP
3
1  carrier protein
  activated by reaction
  with ATP 
Na+ ion
carrier protein
in lipid bilayer
2  changes in shape
  and position of
  carrier protein
Na+ ions released
K+ ions loaded
K+ ions released
Pi
Pi
Indirect active transport
Sodium-dependent glucose cotransporters are a family of glucose transporter found in the small intestine 
and the proximal tubule of nephrons in the kidney. They play an important role in glucose absorption.
These cotransporters move glucose in one direction (into the cell) across the membrane and move 
sodium in the same direction (Figure B2.1.23). Two sodium ions pass through the cotransporter protein 
for each glucose molecule. Active transport of sodium at the base of the cell, using sodium–potassium 
pumps (see Figure B2.1.22) builds up a concentration gradient of sodium by removing sodium from 
the cell, so sodium can enter through the cotransporter protein down its concentration gradient. 
At the same time, glucose is drawn into the cell through the same cotransporter as the sodium 
(Figure B2.1.23). In this way, sodium-dependent glucose cotransporters allow glucose to be transported 
into cells against its concentration gradient. Because glucose is not directly moved into the cell by active 
transport, but in conjunction with the active transport of sodium ions out from the opposite side of the 
cell, this process is known as indirect active transport. Glucose leaves the cell via facilitated diffusion 
at the base of the cell, via a glucose transporter (Figure B2.1.23).
glucose
sodium–potassium
pump
basolateral
side of cell
microvillus
sodium-dependent glucose
cotransporter protein
Na+
2Na+
Na+
K+
K+
glucose
glucose
ATP
ADP + Pi
glucose
transporter
2Na+
Na+
glucose
glucose
glucose-binding
site
Na+ binding site
 
■Figure B2.1.23 Epithelial cell with sodium-dependent glucose transporter


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.1   Membranes and membrane transport
243
Adhesion of cells to form tissues
The cells in animal tissues are ‘glued’ together by cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs) – proteins embedded 
in the cells’ surface membranes. Cell adhesion is essential for maintaining tissue structure and function. 
In multicellular organisms, the binding between CAMs causes cells to adhere (stick) to each other and 
form a structure called a cell junction. Some CAMs bind cells to one another or to other CAMs; other 
types bind cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM) to form a cohesive unit (Figure B2.1.24). The ECM 
is the non-cellular component present within all tissues and organs that provides essential physical 
scaffolding for the cellular constituents; for example, collagen fibres and bone mineral comprise the 
ECM of bone tissue. Different forms of CAMs are used for different types of cell–cell junction. 
cell–matrix
junctions
tight junction
anchoring junction
gap junction
cell–cell
junctions
microvillus
extracellular matrix
actin-linked cell
matrix junction
 
■Figure B2.1.24 Different types of CAMs and cell junctions present in 
epithelial cells, including cell–cell junctions and cell–matrix junctions 
Cell junctions can be divided into two overall types:
l	 cell–cell junctions (usually involving cadherin proteins)
l	 cell–extracellular matrix junctions (usually involving integrin proteins).
Cell junctions can be classified according to their functions:
l	 anchoring junctions: strengthen contact between cells
l	 tight junctions: seal gaps between cells through cell–cell contact
l	 gap junctions: link the cytoplasm of adjacent cells, allowing transport of molecules between them
l	 signal-relaying junctions: e.g. synapses.
Tight junctions act as an impermeable or semipermeable barrier between adjacent epithelial cells. 
They are barriers to the transportation of material and control the movement of membrane transport 
proteins between the apical and basal layers of epithelia.
The cells of higher plants, such as the flowering plants, contain relatively few CAMs. Instead, plant 
cells are held together rigidly by extensive interlocking of the cell walls of adjacent cells. 
The cytoplasm of adjacent animal or plant cells often are connected by functionally similar but 
structurally different ‘bridges’ called gap junctions in animals (Figure B2.1.24) and plasmodesmata 
in plants (see Chapter B3.2, page 306). These structures allow cells to exchange small molecules 
including nutrients and chemical signals, coordinating the function of the cells in a tissue. 
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What processes depend on active transport in biological systems?
2	 What are the roles of cell membranes in the interaction of a cell with its environment?
	
◆Cell-adhesion 
molecule (CAM): 
proteins located on the 
cell surface that are 
involved in binding cells 
with other cells or the 
extracellular matrix. 
	
◆Extracellular 
matrix (ECM): a large 
network of proteins and 
other molecules that 
surround, support and 
give structure to cells and 
tissues in the body.
Top tip!
You are not required 
to have detailed 
knowledge of the 
different types of 
CAMs or junctions.
Top tip!
Both cadherins 
and integrins are 
transmembrane 
proteins.
