Theme B: Form and function – Cells
244
B2.2
Organelles and 
compartmentalization
•	 How are organelles in cells adapted to their functions?
•	 What are the advantages of compartmentalization in cells?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B2.2.1 	 Organelles as discrete subunits of cells that are adapted to perform 
specific functions 
	 B2.2.2 	 Advantage of the separation of the nucleus and cytoplasm into separate 
compartments
	 B2.2.3 	 Advantages of compartmentalization in the cytoplasm of cells
	 B2.2.4 	 Adaptations of the mitochondrion for production of ATP by aerobic cell 
respiration (HL only)
	 B2.2.5 	 Adaptations of the chloroplast for photosynthesis (HL only)
	 B2.2.6 	 Functional benefits of the double membrane of the nucleus (HL only)
	 B2.2.7 	 Structure and function of free ribosomes and of the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum (HL only)
	 B2.2.8 	 Structure and function of the Golgi apparatus (HL only)
	 B2.2.9 	 Structure and function of vesicles in cells (HL only)
Organelles 
Organelles are discrete (separate) subunits in cells, and include the nuclei, chloroplasts, 
mitochondria, vesicles, ribosomes and the plasma membrane. The only organelles common to both 
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells are the cell membrane and ribosomes. The cell wall, cytoskeleton 
and cytoplasm are not considered organelles. 
Top tip!
Most organelles are surrounded by membrane and are known as ‘membrane-bound’ organelles, 
such as the rough endoplasmic reticulum, smooth endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus and the 
double membrane that surrounds the nucleus. Eukaryotic cells contain membrane-bound organelles, 
but prokaryotic cells do not.
Link
Organelles found in 
eukaryotic cells were 
introduced in Chapter 
A2.2, page 64.
Theme B 
Form and function – Cells


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.2   Organelles and compartmentalization
245
Nature of science:  Experiments
New experimental techniques often bring breakthroughs in knowledge in science. For example, 
studying the function of individual organelles in cells became possible after the ultracentrifuge 
was invented and methods of using it for cell fractionation were developed.
Centrifugation is used for two basic purposes in cell biology: as a preparative technique to 
separate one type of material or substance from others, and as an analytical technique to measure 
physical properties (e.g., molar mass, density, shape and binding ability) of macromolecules. 
cell homogenate:
before centrifugation
supernatant:
smaller, less-dense
components
pellet:
larger, more-dense
components
Before
After
centrifugation
 
■Figure B2.2.1 Principle of centrifugation applied to a cell homogenate 
(cells with broken plasma membranes but intact organelles)
Centrifuges spin fluids at very high speeds, separating particles depending on their density. 
More‑dense particles settle at the bottom of the tube, while less-dense particles rise to the top. 
A centrifuge increases the rate of sedimentation by subjecting particles in suspension to centrifugal 
forces as great as 1 000 000 times the force of gravity, g. This can sediment particles with molar 
masses as small as 10 000 g mol−1. Modern ultracentrifuges achieve these centrifugal forces by 
reaching speeds of 150 000 revolutions per minute (rpm) or higher. 
Theodor Svedberg, a Swedish chemist and Nobel laureate who designed the first ultracentrifuge 
in 1925, studied haemoglobin and found that the centrifuged sample revealed a single, sharp 
band with a molar mass of weight of 68 000 g mol−1. His results strongly supported the theory that 
proteins were true macromolecules and not mixtures.
Cell fractionation and separation of animal cell homogenates (a suspension of cell fragments) into 
the various organelles was first achieved during the 1940s. At low speeds, nuclei fall to the bottom 
of the container. At a slightly higher speed, mitochondria can be collected and, at even higher 
speeds and longer times, ribosomes can be collected.  
These techniques have allowed biologists to study biological processes free from all the complex 
side reactions that occur in a living cell, by using purified cell-free systems. For example, the 
mechanism of protein synthesis (translation) was discovered in experiments that used a cell 
homogenate that could translate mRNA molecules to produce proteins. Ultracentrifugation was 
used in the Meselson and Stahl experiment (page 603).
Common 
mistake
Centrifugation does 
not separate organelles 
based on their size, 
but on their relative 
density.
TOK
How important 
are material tools 
in the production 
or acquisition of 
knowledge?
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying and using non-SI metric units
As well as his contribution of designing the first 
ultracentrifuge, Theodor Svedberg also gave his name 
to the non-SI unit, the Svedberg unit (represented 
as S or sometimes Sv). This non-SI unit is used to 
measure the time it takes a particle of a certain size 
to settle at the bottom of a solution. It is measured 
at exactly 10−13 seconds. The particle’s mass, density 
and shape all affect its S value. This is how ribosomes 
are differentiated – based on their sedimentation 
rate. The 70S ribosome in chloroplasts, mitochondria 
and prokaryotes has a sedimentation rate of 
70 × 10−13 seconds.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
246
Advantages of separating the 
nucleus and cytoplasm
The nuclear membrane keeps DNA separate from the other parts of the cell, which protects it from 
the many cellular reactions that occur in the cytoplasm. Additionally, separating the nucleus and 
cytoplasm allows gene transcription and translation to be kept separate.
The Human Genome Project (and similar studies of the genomes of other organisms) established 
the sequence of bases in many genes (see Chapter A3.1, page 117). This led to the discovery of 
some non-coding regions in the base sequences of genes. Many of the genes of eukaryotes have 
non-coding DNA sequences within their regions. The sections of the gene that carry meaningful 
information (code for amino acids) are called exons. The non-coding sequences that intervene – 
interruptions, in effect – are called introns. 
While genes split in this way are very common in higher plants and animals, some eukaryotic genes 
contain no introns at all. When a gene consisting of exons and introns is transcribed into mRNA, 
the mRNA formed contains the sequence of introns and exons exactly as they occur in the DNA. 
If this unmodified mRNA was to be ‘read’ and transcribed in a ribosome, it would undoubtedly 
present problems in the protein-synthesis step (translation). In fact, an enzyme-catalysed reaction, 
known as post-transcriptional modification, removes the introns as soon as the mRNA has been 
formed. The production of this enzyme is also under the control of a gene. As a result, the short 
lengths of ‘nonsense’ transcribed into the RNA sequence of bases are removed. This is known as 
RNA splicing, and the resulting shortened lengths of mRNA are described as ‘mature’. It is this 
form of mRNA that passes out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm, to go to the ribosomes where it is 
involved in protein synthesis (page 253). Post-transcriptional modification of mRNA can happen in 
the nucleus before the mRNA meets ribosomes in the cytoplasm. This is an advantage for eukaryotic 
cells as variants of a protein can be produced from a single gene, due to gene splicing.
In prokaryotes, such modification of mRNA is not possible as there is no nuclear membrane 
separating DNA from the cytoplasm, so mRNA may immediately meet ribosomes. The genes of 
prokaryotes therefore do not have introns, and the prokaryotic cell does not have the enzyme 
machinery to carry out splicing, either.
Like other cell membranes, the nuclear membrane is a phospholipid bilayer, which is permeable only 
to small, non-polar molecules. Other molecules are unable to diffuse through the phospholipid 
bilayer. Lamins (which are intermediate protein filaments and are a major component of the 
cytoskeleton – see page 72) are important in nuclear membrane function (see page 252). The nuclear 
pores in the nuclear envelope control the exit of mRNA from the nucleus, and the entry and exit of 
proteins (Figure B2.2.2). The pores are made of specific proteins forming a specific structure. The 
pores are tiny, about 100 nm in diameter, but so numerous that they make up about one-third of the 
nuclear membrane’s surface area. This suggests that communication between the nucleus and 
cytoplasm is important. The selective movement of proteins and RNA through the nuclear pores not 
only establishes the internal composition of the nucleus, but also plays an essential role in regulating 
eukaryotic gene expression.
Link
Introns and exons 
are covered in more 
detail in Chapter D1.2, 
page 626.
	
◆Nuclear pore: a 
protein-lined channel in 
the nuclear envelope; 
regulates the transport 
of molecules between 
the nucleus and the 
cytoplasm. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.2   Organelles and compartmentalization
247
Nuclear pores transport proteins in their folded conformation and 
ribosomal components as assembled particles. This distinguishes 
the nuclear transport mechanism from the mechanisms that 
transport proteins into most other organelles. Proteins must unfold 
to cross the membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts.
RNA molecules that are synthesized in the nucleus must be 
exported to the cytoplasm efficiently, where they function in 
protein synthesis. 
Proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm, so the transport of 
mRNA, rRNA and tRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm is a 
critical step in gene expression in eukaryotic cells. Export of RNA 
through nuclear pore complexes is an active process that requires 
energy (Figure B2.2.2). Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is assembled with 
ribosomal proteins in the nucleolus, and ribosomal subunits are 
then transported into the cytoplasm. 
Advantages of compartmentalization 
in the cytoplasm of cells
Each organelle has a different function, carrying out a specific biological process and a different set 
of chemical reactions. At the most basic level, biochemical reactions within the organelles are what 
sustain life. The organelles separate the various biochemical reactions that are needed to support the 
cell’s function. Each fulfils a different role and contains different chemical reactions, but all cooperate 
and work together.
Compartmentalization (the division of the interior cell into separate, discrete areas) allows the correct 
concentration of metabolites to be present for specific metabolic processes and the appropriate 
enzymes to be present. In this way, incompatible biochemical processes can be separated.
Top tip!
Separating the reactions of life by compartmentalization means that they can be controlled and do 
not interfere with each other. Think about the way that different operations in a factory are divided 
into different areas; for example, in a car factory one area will be used to assemble the engine, 
another to put together the car framework, and so on.
 
■Lysosomes 
Lysosomes are tiny spherical vesicles bound by a single membrane (Chapter A2.2, page 71). 
These organelles contain digestive enzymes in an acidic environment. The hydrolytic enzymes are 
active only in the lysosome’s acidic interior. The pH of the cell is neutral to slightly alkaline, so the 
enzymes’ acid-dependent activity protects the cell from self-digestion in case of lysosomal leakage 
or rupture. This is an example of how the compartmentalization provided by lysosomes allows 
functions to occur that would not be possible or controllable in the wider interior of the cell.
 
■Phagocytic vacuoles
Phagocytosis is a process used by specific cells to capture and ingest foreign particles (see page 522). 
Phagocytic white blood cells engulf ‘foreign’ material, such as bacteria, then digest and destroy it. 
nuclear pore
cytoplasm
small molecules
and ions
passive
diffusion
mRNA
E
E
protein
active
transport
inside
nucleus
nuclear
membrane
 
■Figure B2.2.2 Transport across the nuclear membrane
1	 Explain how 
the structure 
of the nuclear 
envelope facilitates 
translation.
Link
Organelles were 
discussed in detail 
in eukaryotic cell 
structure in Chapter 
A2.2, page 68.
	
◆Phagocytosis: 
the process by which 
a phagocyte engulfs 
and destroys foreign 
substances, such as 
bacteria.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
248
Phagocytosis involves a series of steps (Figure B2.2.3):
1	 recognition of the foreign particle by receptors, ingestion of 
the foreign particle in a phagocytic vacuole
2	 fusion of the phagocytic vacuole with a lysosome, creating a 
phagolysosome
3	 final destruction of the ingested particle.
The phagocytic vacuole is a temporary organelle formed 
by the process of phagocytosis, from the outer membrane 
of the phagocyte. Fusion with the lysosome provides the 
digestive enzymes needed to break down and destroy the 
foreign particle. The phagocytic vacuole, followed by the 
phagolysosome, provides a contained space within the cell 
where antimicrobial activity can take place at low pH without 
disrupting other metabolic processes.
	
◆Phagocytic vacuole: 
a vesicle formed around 
a particle engulfed 
by a phagocyte via 
phagocytosis.
phagocytic vacuole
receptors
phagocytosis
lysosome
soluble debris
exocytosis
cytoplasm
plasma
membrane
bacterium
phagolysosomes
2
3
1
 
■Figure B2.2.3 The process of phagocytosis
Adaptations of the mitochondrion
Respiration is one of the key life processes and it occurs in all cells of all organisms. It is the 
breakdown of glucose to release the energy contained in the bonds that hold the molecule together, 
converting this energy to ATP (see page 405) and releasing carbon dioxide and water in the process.
Respiration begins in the cytoplasm, in a process called glycolysis. This process is anaerobic, and 
results in the production of pyruvate. This molecule diffuses into the mitochondria, where aerobic 
respiration takes place. 
The mitochondria are formed from two membranes, an inner and outer membrane (Figure B2.2.4). 
The outer membrane contains transport proteins, which move pyruvate into the mitochondrion. 
In the mitochondrion, carbon is removed from pyruvate (in the form of carbon dioxide – this process 
is known as decarboxylation) and hydrogen is also removed (an oxidation reaction). Hydrogen is 
split into protons (H+) and electrons. 
The electrons pass down a sequence of proteins in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion 
(known as the electron transport chain, or ETC), releasing energy that is used to pump the 
protons into the space between the two mitochondrial membranes (called the intermembrane 
space). Protons build up in this small space, accumulating quickly, which creates an electrochemical 
gradient. As well as the ETC, the inner membrane contains a transmembrane multi-protein assembly 
(made from several protein components to form a complex structure), ATP synthase, through which 
the accumulated protons pass, generating ATP. The inner membrane is highly folded into structures 
called cristae, which increases the surface area for the ETC and ATP synthase, increasing the 
production of ATP.
Concept: Form
Mitochondria have adaptations that have evolved from the prokaryotic ancestors that 
first formed this organelle. The highly folded inner membrane increases the surface area 
for the production of ATP, while compartmentalization within the structure enables it to 
separate areas of different proton concentration and pH to create ideal conditions for 
the processes of aerobic respiration.
Concept: 
Function
The structure of 
the mitochondrion 
allows it to optimize 
its function – 
ultimately to 
produce large 
quantities of direct 
energy for the cell 
in the form of ATP.
Link
For full coverage on 
cell respiration and 
all definitions, see 
Chapter C1.2, page 
405.
Link
Pump proteins are 
discussed in Chapter 
B2.1, page 230.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.2   Organelles and compartmentalization
249
The process where hydrogen and carbon atoms are removed from the derived molecules of glucose 
in a sequence of enzyme-controlled stages is called the Krebs cycle. These processes occur in the 
matrix of the mitochondria, which has the appropriate enzymes and pH for the Krebs cycle to occur. 
In this way, mitochondria achieve compartmentalization of enzymes and substrates of the Krebs 
cycle in the matrix.
space between
inner and outer
membranes
scale bar
1 μm
double
membrane
interpretive drawing
Electron micrograph of a mitochondrion 
Mitochondria are the site of the aerobic stage of respiration.
outer membrane
– a smooth
boundary
inner membrane
– infolded,
to form cristae
matrix
– contains
metabolites
and enzymes
 
■Figure B2.2.4 Electron micrograph of a mitochondrion, with an interpretive drawing
Adaptations of the chloroplast
Just as the mitochondria are the site of reactions of the Krebs cycle and respiratory ATP formation, so 
the chloroplasts are the organelles where the reactions of photosynthesis occur. This section contains 
an outline of photosynthesis and relates the processes to adaptations of chloroplasts. 
Chloroplasts are found in green plants. They contain the photosynthetic pigments, along with the 
enzymes and electron-transport proteins for the reduction of carbon dioxide to glucose and for ATP 
formation, using light energy. An electron micrograph of a thin section of a chloroplast shows the 
arrangement of the membranes within this large organelle (Figures A2.2.29, page 76, and B2.2.5 on 
the next page).
There is a double membrane around the chloroplast, and a third inner membrane that folds 
extensively at various points to form a system of branching membranes. Here, these membranes 
are called thylakoids. Thylakoid membranes are organized into flat, compact, circular piles called 
grana (singular, granum), almost like stacks of coins. Between the grana are loosely arranged tubular 
membranes suspended in a watery stroma. Separate grana are connected by lamella (Figure B2.2.5).
Common mistake
It is inaccurate to simply say that the mitochondria carry out ‘respiration’, because anaerobic respiration 
occurs in the cytoplasm. It is correct to say that mitochondria carry out aerobic respiration.
Link
The Krebs cycle is fully 
explored in Chapter 
C1.2, page 412.
Link
The process of 
photosynthesis and 
all definitions are 
in covered in detail 
in Chapter C1.3, 
page 425. 
2	 Using the scale 
bar, calculate 
the length and 
width of the 
mitochondrion in 
Figure B2.2.4.
3	 Explain how 
the structure of 
a mitochondrion 
relates to its 
function.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
250
chloroplast (diagrammatic view)
grana (stereogram)
starch grains
lipid droplets
ribosomes
stroma
granum
outer double
membrane
lamellae of the stroma
thylakoid membrane
of the grana
chlorophyll pigments are contained
in the grana, sandwiched between lipids
and proteins of the thylakoid membranes
electron micrograph of the granum
showing thylakoid membranes in
which chlorophyll pigments are
held (×38 000)  
 
■Figure B2.2.5 The ultrastructure 
of a chloroplast
Concept: Form
The structure, composition and arrangement of membranes are central to the 
biochemistry of photosynthesis, just as the mitochondrial membranes are the sites of 
many of the reactions of aerobic cell respiration.
Chlorophyll, the photosynthetic pigment that absorbs light energy, exists in the grana. Chlorophyll 
molecules are grouped together in structures called photosystems, held in the thylakoid membranes 
of the grana by proteins (Figure B2.2.5). The large surface area provided by the thylakoid membranes 
optimizes the ability of chloroplasts to harvest light energy. The light energy excites electrons, which 
pass down an electron transport chain, which causes protons (H+) to be pumped into the 
thylakoids, causing a build-up of protons there. The small volumes of fluid contained inside 
thylakoids means that protons quickly accumulate there. Protons flow down their electrochemical 
gradient through ATP synthase proteins, from the inside of the thylakoids into the stroma. ATP is 
generated in the process. 
This ATP is used in a biochemical process that occurs in the stroma, known as the Calvin 
cycle (which involves reduction reactions), which ultimately leads to the production of glucose. 
The stroma has the appropriate enzymes and the optimum pH for the Calvin cycle to take place. 
Compartmentalization within chloroplasts allows the separation of the light-harvesting activity of 
the chloroplasts in the thylakoids (known as the light-dependent reactions) from the enzymes and 
substrates of the Calvin cycle (known as light-independent reactions) in the stroma.
Top tip!
As with aerobic 
respiration, 
photosynthesis depends 
on the build-up of 
protons, which then 
move down their 
electrochemical gradient 
to generate ATP.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.2   Organelles and compartmentalization
251
Concept: Function
The roles of the chloroplast, both in terms of light harvesting and the creation of 
molecules such as ATP required by the Calvin cycle, are enhanced by adaptations in its 
structure that enable it to optimize its function.
	ATL B2.2A 
Create a poster that compares and contrasts in summary form the structures and functions of 
mitochondria and chloroplasts. Draw diagrams of both organelles on an A3 sheet – one organelle 
on the left and one on the right. Put similarities in the middle between the two diagrams, and 
differences on the left- and right-hand sides of the sheet.
4	 Construct a 
table to show 
the relationship 
between the 
structure and 
function of a 
chloroplast.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Design a technique for extracting chloroplasts from cells, so that they can be examined 
under a light microscope. If you do not have access to a centrifuge, think about 
alternative ways of obtaining concentrated chloroplasts samples from cells. 
Hint: a food blender can be used to break open cells, and muslin cloth used as a filter. 
How would you ensure that the chloroplasts are not damaged by movement of water 
in or out of them by osmosis?
Functional benefits of the 
nucleus double membrane
The nucleus is the largest organelle in the eukaryotic cell, typically 10–20 µm in diameter. It is 
surrounded by two membranes, known as the nuclear envelope. The outer membrane is continuous 
with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which makes it easy for the nucleus to obtain proteins made in 
the ER, so endocytosis (which requires energy, see page 239) is not needed. 
The nuclear envelope contains many pores (see page 68, and Figure B2.2.6 below). The pores are 
very small, about 100 nm in diameter. However, they are so numerous that they make up about 
one-third of the nuclear membrane’s surface area. As discussed on page 246, the function of the 
pores is to make possible rapid movement of molecules between the nucleus and cytoplasm (such as 
mRNA) and between the cytoplasm and the nucleus (such as proteins, ATP and some hormones). 
The double membrane of the nucleus is comprised of one membrane that is folded to form a double 
structure: the membrane is continuous across the inner and outer surfaces of the nuclear envelope 
(Figure B2.2.6). This allows the nuclear envelope to connect with the ER.
Common 
mistake
Students sometimes 
draw the nuclear 
membrane as a single 
line – this is incorrect. 
The double membrane 
needs to be clearly 
drawn, with the 
nuclear pores within it.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
252
outer
surface
inner
surface
endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)
ER lumen
ribosome
pore
chromatin
nucleolus
nuclear envelope
The inner membrane contains the DNA and nucleolus. The inner nuclear membrane is lined by 
the nuclear lamina, which is a meshwork of filaments that extend into the interior of the nucleus 
and provide structural support. The lamina is present in animal cells but not plant or fungal cells, 
and is comprised of lamins, a type of fibrous protein. The double membrane therefore allows 
compartmentalization of the functions of the nucleus. 
Cells divide by the processes of mitosis and meiosis. Mitosis results in the production of two 
daughter cells, genetically identical to the parent cell, while meiosis results in the production of sex 
cells (gametes) that are genetically different from the original cell. In the first part of both types of 
cell division, the nuclear envelope dissociates into small vesicles (Figure B2.2.7). This enables the 
chromosomes to encounter the cytoplasm in the cell and the spindle apparatus, which is central to 
manipulating the chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis. 
nuclear
membranes
nuclear
lamina
nuclear pore
mitosis
nuclear membrane
vesicles 
lamins bound
to vesicles
free lamins
 
■Figure B2.2.6 Diagram 
showing the nuclear 
membrane and its 
connection to the ER. The 
proteins that constitute 
the pore complexes are 
not included and the 
size of the pores are 
exaggerated for clarity
Link
Mitosis and meiosis 
are covered in detail 
in Chapter D2.1, 
page 650.
 
■Figure B2.2.7 
Breakdown of the nuclear 
membrane during 
mitosis in an animal cell


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.2   Organelles and compartmentalization
253
Going further
Origin of the nuclear membrane
The origin of the eukaryotic cell was discussed in 
Chapter A2.2 (page 82). One hypothesis is that the 
double membrane of the nucleus is the result of 
endosymbiosis (page 83). The two membranes reflect 
those of the organism that was engulfed and the 
engulfing cell.
An alternative hypothesis is that nuclear membranes 
and the endoplasmic reticulum may have evolved 
through infolding of the plasma membrane. In a very 
old ancestral prokaryotic cell, the plasma membrane 
could have infolded and later formed a two-layered 
envelope of membrane completely surrounding the 
DNA (Figure B2.2.8).
This envelope is assumed to have eventually pinched 
off completely from the plasma membrane.  
A third hypothesis is that the nuclear membrane, 
ER and other membrane-bound organelles (the 
‘endomembrane system’) in eukaryotic cells formed 
from prokaryotic vesicles. A wide range of bacteria 
secrete outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). The vesicles 
play a critical role in the interactions between bacteria 
and between bacteria and their hosts. The hypothesis 
suggests that ancestral mitochondria (prokaryotic cells) 
released OMVs that, during evolution, formed the ER, 
which in turn formed the nuclear envelope.
DNA
membrane-
bound ribosomes
membrane infolds
into cell
ancient prokaryotic cell
ancient eukaryotic cell
cytoplasm
endoplasmic
reticulum
nuclear pore
nucleus
inner nuclear membrane
outer nuclear membrane
 
■Figure B2.2.8 Possible evolutionary sequence for the nucleus
Structure and function of free 
ribosomes and of the RER
Many ribosomes occur freely in the cytoplasm. They are the sites of the synthesis of proteins that are 
to be retained in the cell and fulfil roles there. It is common for several ribosomes to move along the 
messenger RNA at one time. The structure (mRNA, ribosomes and their growing protein chains) is 
called a polysome (Figure B2.2.9). Polysomes allow many copies of a particular polypeptide to be 
produced simultaneously.
ribosome
+
protein
mRNA in
cytoplasm
ribosomes moving
along mRNA
growing polypeptide
chains
     
 
■Figure B2.2.9 A polysome
	
◆Polysome: groups 
of ribosomes that are 
translating the same 
mRNA, indicating the cell 
needs multiple copies of a 
particular polypeptide.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
254
Other ribosomes are bound to the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum (the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum, RER – see page 70). These ribosomes are the site of the synthesis of proteins that go into 
the lumen of the RER for vesicular transport within the cell and subsequent secretion from cells or 
for packaging in lysosomes.
	ATL B2.2B 
Watch an animation of polysomes in action using this site:  
www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/polyribosomes2.html
What are the advantages of having several ribosomes working concurrently on the same mRNA?
Structure and function of the Golgi apparatus
The Golgi apparatus (see page 71) is involved in the processing and secretion of protein. It consists 
of a stack-like collection of flattened membranous sacs called cisternae. Cisternae vary in number, 
shape and organization in different cell types. One side of the stack of membranes is formed by the 
fusion of vesicle membranes from the RER. At the opposite side of the stack, vesicles are formed 
from swellings at the margins that become pinched off. These vesicles contain proteins for transport 
within the cell or for secretion.
Membranes flow from the RER to the Golgi, and on through vesicles to the cell membrane 
(Figure B2.2.10).
Golgi
apparatus
cisternae
plasma membrane
vesicle
direction of
vesicle movement
rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
ribosomes
 
■Figure B2.2.10 Flow of membrane and proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum through the Golgi to 
the plasma membrane
Proteins enter the Golgi apparatus on the side facing the RER and exit on the opposite side of the 
stack, facing the plasma membrane of the cell. Proteins are transferred from one cisterna to the next. 
Each cisterna contains different enzymes, which catalyse different types of protein modification. 
These enzymes catalyse the addition or removal of sugars from proteins (glycosylation), the addition 
of sulfate groups (sulfation) and the addition of phosphate groups (phosphorylation). Some Golgi-
mediated modifications act as signals to direct the proteins to their final destinations within cells, 
including the lysosome and the plasma membrane.
Top tip!
Free ribosomes 
produce proteins for 
use within the cell, 
while those attached 
to the RER produce 
proteins for export or 
movement to the Golgi 
for modification.
Concept: Form
The Golgi apparatus 
is comprised 
of membranes 
arranged in a 
series of stacks. 
Each part of the 
Golgi contains 
enzymes, which 
modify proteins in 
different ways. The 
membranous nature 
of the Golgi allows 
it to fuse with 
vesicles that are also 
made of membrane. 
Concept: 
Function
By compartmentali­
zing protein 
synthesis at 
ribosomes in the 
RER, and protein 
modification in 
the Golgi, the 
production of 
a wide variety 
of proteins and 
modified structures 
can be carefully 
controlled.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.2   Organelles and compartmentalization
255
Structure and function of cell vesicles
Membranes must be able to separate or fuse together so that cells and organelles can bring in, 
transport and release molecules. Many cells take up molecules through receptor-mediated 
endocytosis. A protein (or complex of proteins) initially binds to a receptor on the cell surface. 
A specialized protein acts to cause the membrane in this region to invaginate. One of these 
specialized proteins is clathrin, which polymerizes into a lattice network around the growing 
membrane bud to form a clathrin-coated pit (Figure B2.2.11). The invaginated membrane eventually 
breaks off and fuses to form a vesicle from either the Golgi body or plasma membrane.
substance being
transported into cell
outside
of cell
clathrin-coated pit
receptor
inside
of cell
cell membrane
clathrin-coated
vesicle
naked vesicle
clathrin
 
■Figure B2.2.11 Endocytosis mediated by clathrin
Some hormones, transport proteins and antibodies use receptor-mediated endocytosis to get 
inside a cell. This pathway is also used by viruses (see Chapter A2.3, page 88) and toxins to enter 
cells. The reverse process, the fusion of a vesicle to a membrane, is a critical step in the release of 
neurotransmitters from a neuron into the synaptic cleft.
	ATL B2.2C 
Review your knowledge of organelle structure and function using this site:  
www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/eukaryoticcells.html
Make summary notes on each organelle so you can use them when you revise organelles.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are examples of structure–function correlations at each level of biological organization?
2	 What separation techniques are used by biologists? 
	
◆Invagination: the 
intucking of a surface or 
membrane.
5	 Describe the 
roles of organelles 
involved in the 
synthesis and 
transport of 
proteins destined 
to be embedded 
on the cell surface 
membrane.
