Theme B: Form and function – Cells
256
B2.3
Cell specialization
•	 What are the roles of stem cells in multicellular organizations?
•	 How are differentiated cells adapted to their specialized functions?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B2.3.1 	 Production of unspecialized cells following fertilization and their development 
into specialized cells by differentiation
	 B2.3.2 	 Properties of stem cells
	 B2.3.3 	 Location and function of stem cell niches in adult humans
	 B2.3.4 	 Differences between totipotent, pluripotent and multipotent stem cells
	 B2.3.5 	 Cell size as an aspect of specialization
	 B2.3.6 	 Surface area-to-volume ratios and constraints on cell size
	 B2.3.7 	 Adaptations to increase surface area-to-volume ratios of cells (HL only)
	 B2.3.8 	 Adaptations of type I and type II pneumocytes in alveoli (HL only)
	 B2.3.9 	 Adaptations of cardiac muscle cells and striated muscle fibres (HL only)
	 B2.3.10 	 Adaptations of sperm and egg cells (HL only)
Production of unspecialized cells 
following fertilization 
Multicellular organisms begin life as a single cell called a zygote, which grows and divides, at first 
producing unspecialized cells and then forming many specialized cells. These specialized cells 
eventually form the adult organism (Figure B2.3.1). So, cells arise by division of existing cells. 
The time between one cell division and the next is known as the cell cycle.
young cell
cell division
cell growth
cell specialization
mature cell, unlikely or
unable to divide again
some cells continue to grow and divide
repeatedly, rather than specialize
e.g. stem cells of bone marrow, which divide to form
the cells that develop into red blood cells, white blood
cells and platelets, and more cells forming stem cells
e.g. red blood cell: loses nucleus, and cytoplasm
fills with oxygen-carrying pigment (haemoglobin)
and enzyme (carbonic anhydrase)
stem cells
Extension note
In healthy organisms, cells eventually die by programmed cell death (PCD), a process
controlled by specific genes. In PCD, all parts of a cell are packaged in membrane and
engulfed by surrounding cells. PCD normally takes out all superfluous, infected and
damaged cells. It is a key part of tissue and organ development.
 
■Figure B2.3.1 The life history of a cell and the role of stem cells
During early-stage embryo development, complex mechanisms of gene expression determine the 
ways cells differentiate and take on specific roles. A small number of genes determine body patterns 
during the embryo’s development. The specific signalling molecules that are involved in gene 
expression are called morphogens. 
Morphogens are extracellular (i.e. they exist outside the cells of a tissue) and occur across a 
gradient of concentrations. The gradient of the morphogen drives the process of differentiation of 
unspecialized stem cells into different cell types. Where there is a high concentration of morphogens, 
	
◆Zygote: cell produced 
by the fusion of gametes.
	
◆Cell cycle: repeating 
process of an orderly 
sequence of events where 
cells arise by the division 
of existing cells, grow, 
and then divide.
	
◆Embryo: an organism 
in the earliest stages of 
growth, when its basic 
structures are being 
formed.
	
◆Morphogen: a 
molecule present in a 
concentration gradient 
that specifies the fate 
of each cell along the 
gradient.
Theme B 
Form and function – Cells


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.3   Cell specialization
257
these cells will change differently to cells where there is a lower concentration of morphogens. 
The initiation or inhibition of gene expression is a result of different concentrations of morphogens, 
which control the way cells differentiate and develop into specific tissues. 
The concentration of the morphogen in each cell is important as it determines a series of subsequent 
signals (cascades). Responses to these signals determine the direction and extent of cell growth and 
development, ultimately forming all the tissues and organs of the body. The expression of such 
gradients also controls the length of body structures such as toes and fingers, the location of the nose 
and other body patterns. 
Properties of stem cells
In the development of a new organism, the first step after the formation of the zygote is one of 
continual cell division to produce a tiny ball of cells, called the blastocyst. All these cells are capable 
of further divisions. The cells of the inner cell mass (see Figure B2.3.3, page260) are known as 
embryonic stem cells.
A stem cell is a cell that has the ability for endless repeated cell division. Stem cells maintain an 
undifferentiated state (this is called ‘self-renewal’), while also having the capacity to differentiate 
into mature cell types (potency) along different pathways. Stem cells are the ‘building blocks’ of life; 
they divide and form cells that develop into the range of mature cells of the organism. Stem cells are 
found in all multicellular organisms.
At the next stage of embryological development, most cells lose the ability to divide and differentiate 
as they develop into the tissues and organs that make up the organism, such as blood, nerves, liver, 
brain and many others. However, a very few cells within these tissues keep many of the properties of 
embryonic stem cells. These are called adult stem cells. Table B2.3.1 compares embryonic and adult 
stem cells.
 
■Table B2.3.1 Differences between embryonic and adult stem cells
Embryonic stem cells
Adult stem cells
undifferentiated cells capable of continual cell 
division and of developing into all the cell types of an 
adult organism
undifferentiated cells capable of cell divisions; these 
give rise to a limited range of cells within a tissue, for 
example blood stem cells give rise to red and white 
blood cells and platelets only
make up the bulk of the embryo as it begins 
development
occurring in the growing and adult body, within most 
organs; they replace dead or damaged cells, such as 
in bone marrow, brain and liver
Concept: Function
Although all cells in a multicellular organism contain the same genetic code, because 
they formed from one cell that then divided by mitosis, cells can differentiate into 
different functions. This is because in different cell types, different genes are activated, 
which produce specific structures for the specialized cell.
1	 Outline the 
importance of 
morphogens in the 
development of 
organisms.
	
◆Blastocyst: embryo as 
fluid-filled ball of cells, at 
the stage of implantation.
	
◆Embryonic stem 
cell: undifferentiated cell 
in early-stage embryo, 
capable of continual cell 
division and of developing 
into all the cell types of an 
adult organism.
	
◆Stem cell: 
undifferentiated cell in 
embryo or adult that 
can undergo unlimited 
division and can give rise 
to one of many different 
cell types.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
258
TOK
Should some knowledge not be sought on ethical grounds?
There are clear advantages to using embryonic stem cells instead of adult stem cells in various medical 
treatments. The ethical issues surrounding the harvesting of embryonic stem cells, however, means that 
acting on this knowledge must be considered in a wider social, political and ethical context. That they 
can be used is true, but is it also the role of the biologist to ask should they be used?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
 ATL B2.3A 
Research involving stem cells is increasing and raises ethical issues. What are the ethical issues 
concerning the therapeutic use of stem cells? Evaluate the use of stem cells from specially created 
embryos, from the umbilical cord blood of a newborn baby and from an adult’s own tissues, and 
discuss your thoughts in groups.
2	 List the differences 
between 
embryonic and 
adult stem cells.
Stem cell niches in adult humans
A stem cell niche is an area of a tissue that provides a specific environment where stem cells exist in 
an undifferentiated and self-renewable state, and where they receive stimuli to determine their 
behaviour. Stimuli includes cell-to-cell and molecular signals: these either activate or repress genes 
and the subsequent transcription of proteins. Resulting from this interaction, stem cells are 
maintained in a dormant state, caused to self-renew, or commit to a more differentiated state.
Stem cell niches have defined locations in the body. Two examples of stem cell niches will 
be explored.
 
■Bone marrow
Bone marrow within the skeleton is the site of blood cell formation (also known as haematopoiesis) 
for all vertebrates except for fish and some amphibians. In human adults, osteoblasts (cells that 
regulate the creation of new bone) and haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) (these produce the 
cellular components of blood and blood plasma) are closely connected in the bone marrow. 
HSCs produce red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. 
Research has shown that a subgroup of osteoblasts function as a key component of the HSC niche 
(the osteoblastic niche), controlling HSC numbers. This suggests that these cells rely on each other 
to determine their functions. Cells that give rise to mature skeletal cells are therefore critical in the 
regulation of HSCs. The vascular niche (so called because it is the site of blood vessels) in the adult 
bone marrow is a place for stem cell mobilization or proliferation and differentiation.
 
■Hair follicles
Hair follicles are structures of mammalian skin that can regenerate in order to continuously produce 
new hair.
The stem cell niche of hair follicles is located between the opening of the sebaceous gland and the 
attachment site of the hair erector muscle. They are known as bulge hair follicle stem cells (see 
Figure B2.3.2). These stem cells are multipotent (see below) and have the potential to increase 
rapidly. During the growth phase, hair follicle stem cells become activated to regenerate the hair 
follicle and hair, and hairs grow longer each day. During the resting phase, the stem cells are 
dormant and hairs can shed more easily.
	
◆Stem cell 
niche: specific 
microenvironments in the 
body that either maintain 
the stem cells or promote 
their proliferation and 
differentiation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.3   Cell specialization
259
Complex physiological changes take place in the hair follicle with age. Hair follicles have pigment 
cells that make melanin. Certain stem cells act as pigment-producing cells: when hair regenerates, 
some of the stem cells convert into pigment-producing cells that colour the hair. With age, fewer 
of these cells are active and the hair loses its ability to produce melanin, so the hair greys or turns 
white. An imbalance in stem cell differentiation and altered stem cell activity can also lead to hair 
loss with age.
cornified layer
(dead cells)
hair er
bulge hair follicle stem cells
ector muscle
sensory receptor
(free nerve ending)
sweat gland
root of hair (papilla)
sebaceous gland
epidermis
hair
skin capillary
sensory nerve fibre
hair follicle
adipose tissue
dermis
sweat duct
granular layer
(living cells)
 
■Figure B2.3.2 Structure of the skin, showing location of hair follicle and stem cells
Totipotent, pluripotent and  
multipotent stem cells
The first formed stem cells of a zygote are totipotent and are the most versatile type of stem cell. 
They can become any type of body cell, including making more totipotent stem cells and the cells 
that become the placenta. The cells within the first couple of cell divisions after fertilization are the 
only cells that are totipotent. 
Cell division continues, and the cells organize themselves into a fluid-filled ball called the blastocyst 
(Figure B2.3.3). Stem cells in these subsequent divisions of the embryo are pluripotent. This type of 
stem cell is a little more limited in potential: they can give rise to all of the cell types that make up 
the body, except that they cannot become placental cells or totipotent stem cells. 
By the time differentiation has occurred, stem cells are able only to develop and form the nervous 
system. This restricted potency is referred to as multipotent. Multipotent stem cells can develop 
into more than one cell type but are more limited than pluripotent cells: they have a limited capacity 
for self-renewal. Multipotent stem cells can create, maintain and repair the cells of one particular 
organ or tissue. Stem cells in adult tissue, such as bone marrow, are multipotent (Figure B2.3.3).
Common mistake
Make sure you know the difference between totipotent, pluripotent and multipotent. Simply 
referring to ‘stem cells’ is ambiguous so specific types of stem cells should be referred to, especially 
when discussing a particular stage of development.
Top tip!
As well as hair 
follicles, there are also 
follicles of a different 
kind in the ovaries – 
these are structures 
that surround the 
developing egg and 
release hormones that 
control the menstrual 
cycle (Chapter D3.1, 
page 699).
	
◆Totipotent: capable 
of giving rise to any cell 
type in an organism, 
including making more 
totipotent stem cells and 
making the cells that 
become the placenta.
	
◆Pluripotent: able 
to develop into many 
different types of cells or 
tissues in the body, except 
for becoming placental 
cells or totipotent 
stem cells.
	
◆Multipotent: can 
create, maintain and 
repair the cells of one 
particular organ or tissue.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
260
Concept: Function
As stem cells mature, their function becomes more limited. The early stem cells can 
differentiate into any cell-type in the body, including placental cells, but later stem cells 
can only become a limited range of cells in a particular tissue or organ.
any cell
(totipotent)
blastocyst
adult stem cells (multipotent)
skin
(epidermis)
fat
(adipose tissue)
liver
brain
heart
bone marrow
skeletal muscle
inner cell mass
embryonic
stem cells
(pluripotent)
zygote
 
■Figure B2.3.3 Differences between totipotent, pluripotent and multipotent stem cells
Cell size as an aspect of specialization
Cells exist at a wide variety of different scales, with each type of cell adapted to its function in part 
by its size (Figure B2.3.4).
neuron in brain
300–400 µm long
plant cell
100–150 µm
muscle fibre
300 mm in length
paramecium
250–300 µm
cheek cell
30–50 µm
white blood cell
12–17 µm
red blood cell
8 µm
human egg
100 µm
human
sperm cell
55 µm
 
■Figure B2.3.4 Different size of cells (not to scale)
Top tip!
Make sure you take note of the range of cell sizes in humans including male and female gametes, 
red and white blood cells, neurons and striated muscle fibres.
3	 Define the term 
totipotent stem 
cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.3   Cell specialization
261
 
■Male and female gametes
Male and female gametes in humans are very 
different in size. The egg cell is around 100 μm, 
whereas the main body of the sperm is 5 µm with a 
mid-piece (containing mitochondria) and flagellum 
of 50 µm. The larger cell body of the egg allows it to 
store nutrients for the early development of the 
fertilized egg, whereas the cell body of the sperm 
only needs to hold the nucleus, for delivery to the 
egg, and so can be much smaller. The long flagellum 
of the sperm provides propulsion to reach the egg.
4	 Outline why the female gamete 
in humans is much larger than the 
male gamete.
 
■Blood cells
Red blood cells (erythrocytes) are around 8 µm, 
much smaller than white blood cells (which are 
around 12–17 μm). Red blood cells need to be small 
so that they can fit through the small lumen of 
capillaries. Also, by being small, the red blood cell 
has a larger surface area compared to its size (see 
section below), allowing oxygen to diffuse in and out 
from the cell at a faster rate. 
When foreign matter enters the body, such as a 
bacterium, virus or other organism, white blood 
cells attack and destroy it. White blood cells are 
bigger than red blood cells but fewer in number 
(although they increase in number on infection). 
The larger size of white blood cells allows them 
either to engulf and digest pathogens (see page 522) 
or to produce antibodies that bind to the body’s 
foreign invaders and destroy them (page 523).
	
◆Egg/ovum (plural, 
ova): a female gamete.
	
◆Sperm: motile male 
gamete.
 
■Figure B2.3.6 A light micrograph of a blood smear showing 
erythrocytes (red blood cells) and white blood cells
 
■Figure B2.3.5 Scanning electron micrograph of a sperm cell fertilizing an egg 
cell; note the difference in size between the two cells (magnification ×3600)
Top tip!
Red blood cells are clearly discernible in a microscope image because of their colour and lack of 
nucleus. White blood cells usually have a purple-stained nucleus (Figure B2.3.6) that is either large 
and rounded (lymphocytes) or ‘lobed’ with several different sections joined together (phagocytes). 
The differences between the different types of white blood cell are discussed in Chapter C3.2, 
page 522.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
262
 
■Neurons
Neurons (nerve cells) transmit electrochemical impulses through the body, allowing coordination 
and response to stimuli to occur. They differ in length. The longest neuron in the human body 
reaches from the base of the spine to the foot, a distance of up to one metre. The long length enables 
the electrical impulse to be sent without interruption over a long distance. Response to stimuli, 
especially those concerned with pain, need to happen quickly, and so fast transmission of the 
impulse is necessary – something achieved by the long length of the myelinated neuron.
 
■Striated muscle fibres
Striated muscle fibres are multinucleated cells that attach to muscles to allow movement. Instead 
of being made from many individual cells, muscle fibres are extended cellular structures that can 
be several centimetres long. This extended length allows them to coordinate contraction and has a 
significant effect on muscle force generation.
Further adaptions of these cells, other than size, are discussed later in this chapter (page 268).
Surface area-to-volume ratios and 
the constraints on cell size
The materials required for growth and maintenance of a cell enter through the plasma membrane. 
Similarly, metabolic waste products must leave the cell through the plasma membrane.
The rate at which materials can enter and leave a cell depends on the surface area of that cell, but the 
rate at which materials are used and metabolic waste products are produced depends on the amount 
of cytoplasm present within the cell. Similarly, heat transfer between the cytoplasm and environment 
of the cell is determined by surface area.
As cells grow and increase in size, an important difference develops between the surface area 
available for exchange and the volume of the cytoplasm in which the chemical reactions of life occur. 
The volume increases faster than the surface area; the surface area-to-volume ratio falls (SA:V, 
Figure B2.3.7). So, with increasing size of cell, less and less of the cytoplasm has access to the cell 
surface for exchange of gases, supply of nutrients and loss of metabolic waste products.
dimensions/mm
1 × 1 × 1
2 × 2 × 2
3 × 3 × 3
surface area/mm2
6
24
54
volume/mm3
1
8
27
surface area:
volume ratio
6:1 = 6/1 = 6
24:8 = 24/8 = 3
54:27 = 54/27 = 2
4 × 4 × 4
96
64
96:64 = 96/64 = 1.5
4mm
3mm
2mm
cubic cell of increasing size
decreasing SA:V ratio
progressively less of the cell’s interior has access to the external environment
1mm
 
■Figure B2.3.7 The effect of increasing cell size on the surface area-to-volume ratio
Link
Neurons are covered 
in Chapter C2.2, 
page 467.
Top tip!
Nerve cells can either 
be spelt neuron or 
neurone. In the IB 
Guide, the first spelling 
is used.
Concept: Form 
The size of cells 
or organisms 
is an essential 
feature that 
determines how 
they interact with 
their environment. 
It determines the 
rate of exchange 
of materials across 
a cell surface, and 
whether organisms 
need specialized 
structures such 
as lungs to solve 
problems of size. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B2.3   Cell specialization
263
The exchange of materials across a cell surface depends on its surface area, whereas the need for 
exchange depends on cell volume. The smaller the cell is, the more quickly and easily materials 
can be exchanged between its cytoplasm and environment. One consequence of this is that cells 
cannot grow larger indefinitely. When a maximum size is reached, cell growth stops. The cell may 
then divide. 
Tool 3: Mathematics
Ratios
A ratio is a way to compare amounts. Ratios are similar to fractions and both can be 
simplified by finding common factors, by dividing by the highest common factor.
Ratios can be used in biology to analyse surface area-to-volume relationships. For 
example, in Figure B2.3.7, the surface area-to-volume ratios are displayed for cubic cells.
Top tip!
Volume gets larger 
at a faster rate than 
surface area, so the 
SA:V ratio decreases. 
This limits cell size as 
the smaller surface area 
compared with cell size 
in larger cells means 
that oxygen and food 
cannot be transported 
into the cell and wastes 
removed at sufficient 
rate to maintain 
metabolic activities.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Processing data
An experiment is carried out to explore the impact of 
surface area-to-volume ratio on the rate of diffusion 
into cells. In the experiment, agar jelly blocks represent 
cells and acid represents essential materials needed by 
cells for metabolic reactions. The acid diffuses into each  
of the blocks through the outside surfaces. The faster 
the substances reach all parts of a cell, the more likely 
the cell is to survive. The red dye in the agar jelly blocks 
becomes pink and eventually colourless when mixed and 
reacted with the hydrogen ions in the acid. Movement 
of the hydrogen ions, H+(aq), is by simple diffusion.
The results from the experiment are recorded in 
Table B2.3.2.
 
■Table B2.3.2 Jelly block experiment table of results
Block
Time to turn 
colourless/s
Surface area of block/mm2
Volume of block/mm3
Surface area-to-
volume ratio
A
20
10
20
964
(20 × 20) × 2  
+ (20 × 10) × 4 =
20 × 20 × 10 = 
B
10
10
20
405
(10 × 10) × 2  
+ (20 × 10) × 4 =
20 × 10 × 10 =
C
10
10
10
247
(10 × 10) × 6 = 
10 × 10 × 10 =
D
10
5
10
186
(10 × 10) × 2  
+ (5 × 10) × 4 =
5 × 10 × 10 =
E
5
5
10
81
(5 × 5) × 2  
+ (5 × 10) × 4 =
5 × 5 × 10 =


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Cells
264
Tool 3: Mathematics
Calculating surface area-to-volume ratios
Work out the surface area-to-volume ratio for each 
jelly block. Instead of representing this as a ratio, one 
number can be given because this is easier to plot on 
a graph.
Graphing
Plot a graph of your results from the jelly block 
experiment, with surface area-to-volume ratio on the 
x-axis and time taken for the jelly to completely lose its 
colour on the y-axis.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Analyse your results. What do they tell you about the effect of size on the rate of 
diffusion? What do they tell you about the optimal size for cells?
 ATL B2.3B 
The relative differences in the changes of surface area and 
volume as objects get bigger or smaller is known as the 
square-cube law. This law states that that the volume of an 
object grows faster than its surface area. This is because the 
surface area changes as a factor of the squared value of its 
length, whereas the volume changes as a factor of the cubed 
value. For example, if the size (measured by edge length) of a 
cube is doubled, its surface area will be four times its original 
value, whereas its volume will be eight times its original volume. 
The relationship between surface area and volume as objects 
increase or decrease in size can be explored using online 
calculators, for example:  
https://goodcalculators.com/square-and-cube-calculator/
Calculate a range of different dimensions for an object 
and plot your data. What trends do you see, and what 
implications do they have for biological objects?
Nature of science: Models
Using models to explore the surface area-to-
volume relationship
Models are simplified versions of complex systems. The surface 
area-to-volume relationship can be modelled using cubes with 
different side lengths (see Figure B2.3.8). Although the cubes 
have a simpler shape than real organisms, scale factors operate 
in the same way.
The surface area of each cube can be imagined if each cube is 
spread out flat and the surface of each square added together 
to work out the total surface area.
C
B
A
1
2
3
1
1
2
2
3
3
 
■Figure B2.3.8 Three cubes representing 
cells (or organisms) of different sizes 
5	 Consider imaginary cubic ‘cells’ with sides of 1, 2, 4 and 6 mm.
a	 Calculate the volume, surface area and surface area-to-volume ratio for each cell.
b	 State the effect on the SA:V ratio of a cell as it increases in size.
c	 Explain the effect of increasing cell size on the efficiency of diffusion in the removal 
of metabolic waste products from cell cytoplasm.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.3   Cell specialization
265
TOK
It would be impossible to develop useful knowledge about 
the world without the use of models. Without them, our 
knowledge would be limited to that of specific events and 
objects. This book is full of examples of models – every 
diagram representing a cell or a protein in this book is 
a model. 
Models are only useful when the information they provide is 
an answer to the question being asked. If asked, what shape 
are lipid-anchored proteins? then Figure B2.1.5 (page 226) is 
not useful. However, if you wonder what sort of proteins are 
present in biological membranes, then B2.1.8 to B2.1.10 would 
be very helpful. 
As you use the models in this book, it is worth considering 
for each what the model is being used for, what features of 
the model are therefore relevant, and which elements of the 
model are not meant to convey knowledge.
Adaptations to increase  
surface area-to-volume ratios of cells
Many cells have adaptations to increase their surface area-to-volume ratio. Two examples are 
discussed here.
 
■Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
Red blood cells (erythrocytes) transport respiratory gases (primarily oxygen) in the bloodstream. 
Red blood cells are approximately 8 µm in diameter and have the shape of a flat disk or doughnut 
(Figure B2.3.9), which is round with an indentation in the centre (the surface is said to be biconcave). 
The flattening of the cell increases its surface area relative to its size, increasing the diffusion of 
oxygen across its surface. The flat shape ensures a short distance for diffusion so that oxygen 
can quickly move throughout the cell. The biconcave shape, which can be achieved because the 
erythrocyte does not have a nucleus, also increases the surface area. In addition, the shape of the cell 
increases its flexibility, which helps it move through the narrow lumen of capillaries.
 
■Proximal convoluted tubule cells in the nephron
The role of the kidney is to maintain the homeostatic balance of water in the body, and to filter out 
metabolic wastes (e.g. urea). The functional units of the kidney are the nephrons. These have different 
sections which play specific roles. The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) is the longest section of 
the nephron, and it is here that a large part of the filtrate is reabsorbed into the capillary network. 
Epithelial cells in the PCT reabsorb components of the filtrate that have nutritional significance (such 
as glucose, amino acids and ions). The walls of the tubule are one cell thick, and these cells are packed 
with mitochondria. The surface facing the lumen (the inside space) of the tubule is called the apical 
surface. This is folded into microvilli, forming a brush border (Figure B2.3.10), which greatly 
increases the surface area for absorption. On the other side of the cell – the membrane of tubule cells 
facing the blood at the base of the cell – invaginations (infoldings) of the plasma membrane, like 
brush borders, increase the surface area here too. Invaginations of the basolateral region of the plasma 
membrane are commonly found in cells engaged in active transport of molecules and ions, where the 
infoldings increase the surface area available for transport.
 
■Figure B2.3.9 
An erythrocyte
	
◆Microvillus (plural, 
microvilli): one of 
many tiny infoldings of 
the plasma membrane, 
making up a brush border.
	
◆Brush border: tiny, 
finger-like projections 
(microvilli) on the surface 
of epithelial cells, for 
example in the small 
intestine.
	
◆Invagination: the 
intucking of a surface or 
membrane.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
266
 
■Figure B2.3.11 A coloured SEM of the 
surface of a proximal convoluted kidney 
tubule. What features can you pick out?
Adaptations of type I and type II 
pneumocytes in alveoli
There are some 700 million alveoli in our lungs (Figure B2.3.12), providing a surface area of about 
70 m2 in total. This is an area 30–40 times greater than that of the body’s external skin! The alveoli 
are the major sites of gas exchange in the lungs and their enormous surface area helps to maximize 
gas exchange. Two types of epithelial cells called pneumocytes line the alveoli, and they have 
different adaptions to help with their roles in the alveoli. Alveolar epithelium is an example of a 
tissue where more than one cell type is present, because different adaptations are required for the 
overall function of the tissue.
	
◆Alveolus (plural, 
alveoli): air sac in the 
lung.
	
◆Pneumocyte: 
specialized cells that occur 
in the alveoli of the lungs.
	
◆Epithelium: sheet 
of cells, bound strongly 
together, covering internal 
or external surfaces of 
multicellular organisms.
nucleus
microvilli forming
a brush border
mitochondrion
lateral
infolding
invagination of plasma
membrane on base of cell
 
■Figure B2.3.10 Adaptations of the proximal convoluted tubule 
include microvilli on the upper surface and invaginations on the base 
of the cell, which increase surface area and, therefore, movement of 
molecules and ions through the cell and into blood capillaries
Link
The processes of the kidney are covered 
in detail in Chapter D3.3, page 768. 
Concept: Form
Some cells have adaptations to 
increase surface area-to-volume ratios 
of cells. Red blood cells are flattened 
and biconcave. Microvilli are highly 
folded to increase surface area, and 
found in the proximal convoluted 
tubule of the nephron of kidneys and 
in the wall of the small intestine.
6	 The magnification of Figure B2.3.11 is 
×3600. Calculate the actual size of 
one of the cells. 
7	 Sketch a diagram of one of the 
cells in Figure B2.3.11 and label it 
appropriately.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.3   Cell specialization
267
bronchiole
rib
bronchus
trachea
intercostal muscle
alveoli
lungs
diaphragm
pleural membranes
 
■Type I pneumocytes
The wall of an alveolus is one cell thick. A capillary lies very close to the wall of the alveolus. 
The combined thickness of the alveolar and capillary walls separating air and blood is therefore 
typically only 2–4 μm thick. The capillary is extremely narrow, just wide enough for the red blood 
cells to squeeze through, so the red blood cells are close to, or in contact with, the capillary walls. 
Type I pneumocytes are involved in the process of gas exchange between the alveoli and the capillaries. 
Type I cells have a flattened shape, which means they are extremely thin to minimize diffusion 
distance. The cells are tightly connected to prevent leakage of tissue fluid into alveolar air space.
 
■Type II pneumocytes
Type II pneumocytes produce a detergent-like mixture of lipoproteins and phospholipid-rich secretion 
called surfactant that lines the inner surface of the alveoli. The type II cells are cuboidal in shape and 
bigger than type I so they can store surfactant components. Type II pneumocytes contain many 
secretory vesicles (lamellar bodies) in their cytoplasm that discharge surfactant to the alveolar lumen. 
Surface tension is a force acting to minimize the surface area of a liquid. Because of the tiny diameter of 
the alveoli (about 0.25 mm) they would tend to collapse under surface tension during expiration, with 
the walls sticking together. The lung surfactant secreted by type II pneumocytes lowers the surface 
tension, permitting the alveoli to flex easily as the pressure within the thorax falls and rises.
 
■Figure B2.3.12 The position of 
the alveoli in the human lungs
Common 
mistake
It is incorrect to refer 
to the 'cell wall' of 
the alveolus, as this is 
a term used for plant 
and bacterial cell walls. 
Alveolar walls and 
capillary walls should 
be used when referring 
to the structure of 
the alveoli.
	
◆Surfactant: a 
detergent secreted by 
cells in the wall of alveoli 
which breaks surface 
tension and stops alveoli 
walls from sticking 
together, keeping the 
alveoli open.
airway
alveolus
type II pneumocyte
(surfactant cell)
type I
pneumocyte
red blood cell
capillary
alveolar
macrophage
 
■Figure B2.3.13 Cells of the alveolar epithelium
 
■Macrophages
The extremely delicate structure of the alveoli is protected by 
macrophages (dust cells), abundant in the surface film of moisture. 
These are the main detritus-collecting cells of the body. They originate 
from bone marrow stem cells and are dispersed about the body in 
the blood circulation. These cells migrate into the alveoli from the 
capillaries (Figure B2.3.13). Here, these phagocytic white cells ingest 
any debris, fine dust particles, bacteria and fungal spores present. 
They also line the surfaces of the airways leading to the alveoli.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
268
Adaptations of cardiac muscle cells 
and striated muscle fibres
 
■Cardiac muscle cells
Cardiac muscle is unique to the heart. Heart muscle fibres contract rhythmically from formation until 
they die. Muscles typically contract when stimulated to do so by an external nerve supply; however, 
in the heart the impulse to contract is generated within the heart muscle itself – it is said to have a 
myogenic origin. The central nervous system is not needed to stimulate cardiac muscles to contract. 
Individual cardiac muscle cells have a tubular structure composed of chains of fibres. Each muscle 
fibre is composed of a mass of myofibrils, but we need an electron microscope to see this important 
detail. The myofibrils consist of repeating sections of sarcomeres, which are the fundamental 
contractile units of the muscle cells.
A photomicrograph of cardiac muscle is shown in Figure B2.3.14. Cardiac muscle consists of 
cylindrical branching columns of fibres, forming a unique, three-dimensional network. This allows 
for contraction in three dimensions and for the contraction signal to spread more quickly. Each fibre 
has a single nucleus, and the repeating sarcomeres give it a striped or striated appearance under the 
microscope. Fibres are surrounded by a special plasma membrane, called the sarcolemma, and all 
are very well supplied by mitochondria and capillaries.
Top tip!
The myogenic control of heart muscle contraction plays a role in autoregulation. A constant flow of 
blood must be balanced with blood pressure. The myogenic origin of the impulse to contract means 
that the heart, and therefore blood circulation, can adapt quickly to changes in the body following, 
for example, exercise.
intercalated
discs
striations
sarcolemma
(plasma
membrane of
muscle fibre)
branch
nucleus
 
■Figure B2.3.14 Cardiac muscle
8	 Distinguish 
between type I 
and type II 
pneumocytes.
	
◆Myogenic: originating 
in heart muscle cells 
themselves, as in the 
generation of the 
heartbeat.
	
◆Myofibril: contractile 
protein filament 
from which muscle is 
composed.
	
◆Striated: muscle 
tissue that is marked by 
alternating dark and light 
bands.
	
◆Sarcolemma: 
membranous sheath 
around a muscle fibre.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse 
type I and type II 
pneumocytes. They 
both have different 
structure and functions 
in the alveoli. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.3   Cell specialization
269
Concept: Form and function
Cardiac muscles have intercalated discs to allow easy transfer of electrical impulses 
between cells. Intercalated discs also hold cells together so they cannot separate.
Propagation of stimuli throughout the heart wall
The structure of cardiac muscle cells allows propagation of stimuli through the heart wall. 
Intercalated discs are present at the junctions between cardiac muscle cells. A disc consists of a 
double membrane with gap junctions, through which are cytoplasmic connections between adjacent 
cardiac cells. Gap junctions form channels that allow continuous flow of cytoplasm between cells. 
This direct electrochemical coupling between cells allows waves of depolarization to pass through 
the entire network, synchronizing contraction of the muscle, as if in a single cell.
The branching structure of the cardiac muscle allows connection to multiple cells and provides 
a larger surface area of contact between cells, allowing groups of cells to work together and 
synchronize their activity.
Finally, although cardiac muscle fibres form an interconnected network, the network system of the 
walls of the atria is entirely separate from that of the ventricles. This ensures a transmission delay of 
the electrical signal between atria and ventricles. 
 
■Striated muscle fibres
Skeletal muscles are attached to the moveable parts of skeletons, and the contraction of these muscles 
brings about movement. The muscles are attached by tendons and work in antagonistic pairs.
Skeletal muscle consists of bundles of muscle fibres (Figure B2.3.15). The remarkable feature of a 
muscle fibre is its ability to shorten to half or even a third of the relaxed or resting length. Fibres 
appear striped under the light microscope, so skeletal muscle is also known as striated muscle (like 
cardiac muscle). Each muscle fibre is composed of a mass of myofibrils.
tendon
each fibre consists
of a mass of myofibrils
connective tissue
individual
muscle fibre
alternating light and dark bands
of muscle fibres (when viewed
microscopically)
each muscle fibre contains
several nuclei (i.e. a syncytium)
bundle of thousands
of muscle fibres
skeletal muscle cut to show bundles of fibres
photomicrograph of LS voluntary muscle fibre, HP (×1500)
 
■Figure B2.3.15 The structure of skeletal muscle
Link
For further details 
on heart structure 
(atria and ventricles), 
see Chapter B3.2, 
page 315.
	
◆Intercalated discs: 
link cardiac cells together 
and define their borders, 
and facilitate cell-to-cell 
communication, which is 
needed for coordinated 
muscle contraction.
	
◆Tendon: fibrous 
connective tissue 
connecting a muscle 
to bone.
Link
The sliding filament 
model of muscle 
contraction is covered 
in detail in Chapter 
B3.3, page 327.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
270
The ultrastructure of skeletal muscle
Using electron microscopy, we can see that each muscle fibre consists of many parallel myofibrils, 
within a sarcolemma (a plasma membrane), together with cytoplasm. The cytoplasm contains 
mitochondria packed between the myofibrils. Skeletal muscle fibres are multinucleate (meaning 
they contain multiple nuclei per cell) and contain specialized endoplasmic reticulum. The 
sarcolemma is folded to form a system of transverse tubular endoplasmic reticulum, known as 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. This is arranged as a network around individual myofibrils. The arrangement 
of myofibrils, sarcolemma and mitochondria, surrounded by the sarcoplasmic membrane, is shown 
in Figure B2.3.16.
sarcoplasmic
membrane
myofibril
sarcoplasm (cytoplasm of
muscle cell)
mitochondrion
sarcoplasmic reticulum
with transverse tubules
electron micrograph of TS through part
of a muscle fibre, HP (x36 000)
stereogram of part of a single muscle fibre
 
■Figure B2.3.16 The ultrastructure of a muscle fibre
Is striated muscle fibre a cell?
The striated muscle fibres that make up the skeletal muscles of mammals have an atypical cell 
structure. The fusion of cells to create one elongated fibre, resulting in a multinucleated structure, is 
very different from the typical cell structure. This leads to the question: is a striated muscle fibre a cell? 
Myofibrils give the impression of a structure that goes beyond that of a simple cell, and muscle fibres 
are long and can measure 300 mm or more – much larger than regular cells. 
However, the fibres contain the usual organelles of a cell, such as mitochondria and endoplasmic 
reticulum, and are surrounded by one cell membrane, thus indicating they are cells. Striated muscle 
fibres do, however, challenge the view that cells act as autonomous (i.e. self-sufficient) units.
Striated muscle has similarities with cardiac muscle. Like cardiac muscle fibres, skeletal muscle fibres 
are surrounded and enclosed by a membrane, the sarcolemma, from which transverse tubules 
(T tubules) tunnel in and around the sarcomeres. Also present, here, is the fluid-filled system 
of branching membranous sacs, the sarcoplasmic reticulum – a modified form of endoplasmic 
reticulum. Like cardiac muscles, skeletal muscle fibres are striated in appearance, and have a similar 
arrangement of actin and myosin filaments. Finally, all muscle tissue consists of fibres that can 
shorten by a half to a third of their length. Both types of muscle have many mitochondria to increase 
the supply of ATP for muscle contraction. 
9	 State the 
differences 
between cardiac 
muscle and striated 
muscle.
Link
Muscles are covered 
in more detail 
in Chapter B3.3, 
page 327.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B2.3   Cell specialization
271
Adaptations of sperm and egg cells
Sexual reproduction is the production of offspring from two parents using gametes – egg and sperm 
cells in animals. The cells of the offspring have two sets of chromosomes (one from each parent). 
Sexual reproduction involves two stages:
l	 meiosis – the special cell division that makes gametes with half the number of chromosomes 
(haploid, that is, one set of chromosomes)
l	 fertilization – the fusion of two gametes to form a zygote (back to two sets of chromosomes).
Human gametes have specific adaptations that allow them to carry out their function.
 
■Sperm cell
acrosome (contains
hydrolytic enzymes)
nucleus
(haploid)
centriole
middle piece
with
mitochondria
flagellum contains microtubules
in a 9 + 2 arrangement
plasma
membrane
 
■Figure B2.3.17 A human sperm cell
Structures and functions of a mature sperm cell:
l	 flagellum – motility
l	 middle piece – contains many mitochondria to provide the energy required for the movement of 
the flagellum
l	 head – surrounded by a plasma membrane, containing a haploid nucleus; the head is smooth 
and oval in shape to make the cell streamlined for fast movement
l	 acrosome (at the top of the head) – contains enzymes for digesting the zona pellucida (jelly coat, 
containing glycoproteins) in the oocyte (egg).
Concept: Function
The role of a sperm is to deliver a nucleus from a male into the egg of a female, so 
that fertilization can take place and a new zygote formed. Only the nucleus enters the 
egg cell – the rest of the cell (the neck and the flagellum) remains outside the egg. 
This means that all mitochondria are from the mother via the egg cell.
 
■Egg cell
Egg cells, or ova, go through several stages of development. Primary oocytes (immature egg cells) 
are formed after the first stage of meiosis. During the menstrual cycle, once a month, one primary 
oocyte then begins the second stage of meiosis to produce a secondary oocyte and a polar body 
(containing a second haploid nucleus, but which contains unequal division of cytoplasm and fails 
to develop further). Meiosis is only completed at fertilization (for further details see Chapter D3.1,  
page 694). By delaying the two divisions of meiosis (meiosis I and meiosis II), the oocyte is 
provided with more genetic material for longer, for mRNA production and subsequent protein 
synthesis – an important factor as the cell grows and matures.
	
◆Oocyte: a female 
sex cell in the process 
of a meiotic division to 
become an ovum.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Cells
272
Concept: Form
Eggs cells go through several stages of development, only becoming the final egg 
cell on fertilization. Eggs are much larger than sperm, as they contain all the nutrients 
needed for the growth and development of the zygote. 
Structures and functions of a mature secondary oocyte:
l	 follicle cells nourish and protect the oocyte
l	 zona pellucida (jelly coat) allows binding of sperm cells, 
prevents polyspermy (several sperm haploid nuclei 
entering) and premature implantation of the embryo 
(ectopic pregnancy); this is also the place where the polar 
body is found
l	 plasma membrane surrounds the haploid nucleus and 
contains microvilli to absorb nutrients from follicular cells
l	 cortical granules prevent polyspermy during fertilization
l	 cytoplasm – the place for metabolic reactions and where all 
organelles are located
l	 nucleus – a haploid nucleus (half the chromosome number).
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the advantages of small size and large size in biological systems?
2	 How do cells become differentiated?
haploid nucleus
cytoplasm
cortical
granules
layer of
follicle cells
jelly coat
(zona pellucida)
plasma
membrane
of secondary
oocyte
polar
body
centrioles
 
■Figure B2.3.18 The structure of a mature secondary oocyte
