B3.1   Gas exchange
273
B3.1
Gas exchange
•	 How are multicellular organisms adapted to carry out gas exchange?
•	 What are the similarities and differences in gas exchange between a flowering plant 
and a mammal?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B3.1.1 	
Gas exchange as a vital function in all organisms 
	 B3.1.2 	 Properties of gas-exchange surfaces
	 B3.1.3 	 Maintenance of concentration gradients at exchange surfaces in animals
	 B3.1.4 	 Adaptations of mammalian lungs for gas exchange
	 B3.1.5 	 Ventilation of the lungs
	 B3.1.6 	 Measurement of lung volumes
	 B3.1.7 	
Adaptations for gas exchange in leaves
	 B3.1.8 	 Distribution of tissues in a leaf
	 B3.1.9 	
Transpiration as a consequence of gas exchange in a leaf
	 B3.1.10	 Stomatal density
	 B3.1.11 	 Adaptations of foetal and adult haemoglobin for the transport of oxygen 
(HL only)
	 B3.1.12 	 Bohr shift (HL only)
	 B3.1.13 	 Oxygen dissociation curves as a means of representing the affinity of 
haemoglobin for oxygen at different oxygen concentrations (HL only)
Theme B 
Form and function – Organisms
 
■Gas exchange – meeting the needs 
of respiration
Cellular respiration is the controlled release of energy, in the 
form of ATP, from organic compounds in cells. Respiration 
occurs continuously in living cells, largely in the mitochondria 
of eukaryotic organisms and the cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells. 
To support aerobic cellular respiration, cells take in oxygen from 
their environment and release carbon dioxide by a process called 
gaseous exchange (Figure B3.1.1). 
Gas exchange is the exchange of gases between an organism and 
its surroundings, including the uptake of oxygen and the release of 
carbon dioxide in animals. Plants uptake oxygen and release 
carbon dioxide at night and take in carbon dioxide and release 
oxygen during the day. 
cell surface
membrane
O2
CO2
CO2
O2
O2
CO2
CO2
O2
mitochondrion –
organelle in which
some of the steps
of energy transfer
occur (page 69)
outside cell
low CO  concentration,
2
high O2 concentration
inside cell
high CO  concentration,
2
low O2 concentration
 
■Figure B3.1.1 Gas exchange in an animal cell
	
◆Gas exchange: 
exchange of respiratory 
gases (oxygen, carbon 
dioxide) between cells/
organism and the 
environment.
Gas exchange as a vital function in all organisms


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
274
The exchange of gases between the individual cell and its environment takes place by diffusion. 
For example, in cells that are respiring aerobically there is a higher concentration of oxygen outside 
the cells than inside, and so there will be a continuous net inward diffusion of oxygen.
Concept: Form
In living organisms, factors that determine the rate of diffusion include:
l	 The size of the surface area available for gas exchange (the respiratory surface) 
– the greater this surface area, the greater the rate of diffusion. In a single cell, the 
respiratory surface is the whole plasma membrane.
l	 The difference in concentration (concentration gradient) – a rapidly respiring 
organism has a very much lower concentration of oxygen in the cells and a 
higher-than-normal concentration of carbon dioxide. The greater the gradient in 
concentration across the respiratory surface, the greater the rate of diffusion.
l	 The length of the diffusion path – the shorter the diffusion path, the greater the 
rate of diffusion, so the respiratory surface must be as thin as possible.
Top tip!
Energy for diffusion comes from the kinetic energy of molecules. The higher the temperature, the 
faster the rate of diffusion due to the increased kinetic energy of molecules. In warm-blooded animals, 
temperature is kept constant through homeostatic mechanisms and so the effects of temperature on 
diffusion do not vary.
 
■Challenges of gas exchange
The challenges of gas exchange become greater as organisms increase in size because their surface 
area-to-volume ratio decreases with increasing size, and the distance from the centre of an 
organism to its exterior increases. The surface area of a single-celled organism is large in relation 
to the amount of cytoplasm it contains, so the surface of the cell is sufficient for efficient gaseous 
exchange. On the other hand, most cells in large multicellular organisms are too far from the 
surface of the body to receive enough oxygen by diffusion alone. In addition, animals often develop 
an external surface of tough or hardened skin that, while it provides protection to the body, is not 
suitable for gaseous exchange. These organisms require an alternative respiratory surface.
Active organisms have an increased metabolic rate, and the demand for oxygen in their cells is higher 
than in sluggish and inactive organisms. Therefore, large, active organisms have specialized organs 
for gaseous exchange.
Properties of gas-exchange surfaces
All gas-exchange surfaces need properties that increase the rate of diffusion of respiratory gases 
across them. These properties include:
l	 permeability – to allow the gases across
l	 thin tissue layer – to make the shortest distance for diffusion as possible
l	 moisture – gases dissolve in the moisture, helping them to pass across the gas-exchange surface
l	 large surface area – so that large quantities of the respiratory gases can cross at the same time.
Link
The surface area-
to-volume ratio is 
covered in detail 
in Chapter B2.3, 
page 262.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
275
Maintenance of concentration gradients 
at exchange surfaces in animals
Diffusion requires a concentration gradient to be maintained – the steeper the gradient, the faster 
the diffusion (Figure B3.1.2). A concentration gradient needs to be maintained at the gas-exchange 
surface as this allows oxygen to diffuse into the body and carbon dioxide to diffuse out. 
location in body
concentration of carbon dioxide
blood
lungs
high concentration of carbon dioxide
low concentration of 
carbon dioxide
 
■Figure B3.1.2 The concentration gradient in alveoli allows carbon dioxide to diffuse from the blood
 
■How are concentration gradients maintained?
There are three ways in which a concentration gradient is maintained at exchange surfaces:
l	 a dense networks of blood vessels: capillaries provide a large surface area for the diffusion of 
respiratory gases; blood carries the gases either in red blood cells (mainly oxygen) and plasma 
(carbon dioxide)
l	 a continuous blood flow: this maintains the difference in concentration of molecules between 
the air and blood by carrying oxygen away from the gas-exchange surfaces in the capillaries and 
carbon dioxide to them
l	 ventilation: with air for lungs and with water for gills, ventilation brings oxygen to the gas-
exchange surface and removes carbon dioxide.
Gas exchange in mammals
 
■The lungs
In mammals, the lungs are the organs where gas exchange occurs. Lungs provide a large, thin, moist 
surface area that is suitable for gaseous exchange. However, the lungs are in a protected position inside 
the thorax (chest), so air must be brought to the respiratory surface there: the lungs must be ventilated. 
A ventilation system is a pumping mechanism that moves air into and out of the lungs efficiently, 
thereby maintaining the concentration gradients of oxygen and carbon dioxide for diffusion.
In addition, in mammals the conditions for diffusion at the respiratory surface are improved by:
l	 a blood circulation system, which rapidly moves oxygen to the body cells as soon as it has 
crossed the respiratory surface, thereby maintaining the concentration gradient in the lungs
l	 a respiratory pigment, which increases the oxygen-carrying ability of the blood. This is the 
haemoglobin of the red blood cells, which are by far the most numerous of the cells in our 
blood circulation.
	
◆Concentration 
gradient: the difference 
in concentration of a 
substance between one 
area and another.
	
◆Thorax: in mammals, 
the upper part of the 
body separated from the 
abdomen; in insects, the 
region between head and 
abdomen.
1	 List three 
characteristics of 
an efficient gas-
exchange surface. 
Explain how 
each influences 
diffusion.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
276
The structure of the lung of mammals
The structure of the human thorax is shown in Figure B3.1.3. The lungs are in the thorax, an airtight 
chamber formed by the ribcage and its muscles (intercostal muscles), with a domed floor, the 
diaphragm. The diaphragm is a sheet of muscle attached to the body wall at the base of the ribcage, 
separating the thorax from the abdomen. The internal surfaces of the thorax are lined by the pleural 
membrane, which secretes and maintains pleural fluid. Pleural fluid is a lubricating liquid derived 
from blood plasma; it protects the lungs from friction during breathing movements. 
br onchus
intercostal
muscles:
  internal
  external
lung
diaphragm
abdominal
cavity
nasal cavity
larynx
oesophagus
trachea
pleural membranes
pleural cavity
containing pleural
fluid
position of
the heart
bronchioles
ribs (in section)
 
■Figure B3.1.3 The structure of the human thorax
From trachea to alveoli
The lungs connect with the rear of the mouth by the trachea (Figure B3.1.3). The trachea then 
divides into two bronchi, one to each lung. Within the lungs the bronchi divide into smaller 
bronchioles. The finest bronchioles end in the alveoli (air sacs). The walls of bronchi and larger 
bronchioles contain smooth muscle and are also supported by rings or tiny plates of cartilage, 
preventing collapse that might be triggered by a sudden reduction in pressure that occurs with 
powerful inspirations of air. 
Lungs are extremely efficient, but they cannot prevent some water loss during breathing – an issue 
for most terrestrial organisms. 
	
◆Intercostal muscles: 
muscles between the ribs 
involved in ventilation.
	
◆Diaphragm: sheet of 
tissues, largely muscle, 
separating thorax from 
abdomen in mammals.
	
◆Pleural membrane: 
lines lungs and thorax 
cavity; it secretes the 
pleural fluid.
	
◆Trachea: windpipe
	
◆Bronchus (plural, 
bronchi): a tube 
connecting the trachea 
with the lungs.
	
◆Bronchiole: small 
terminal branch of a 
bronchus.
	
◆Alveolus (plural, 
alveoli): air sac in the 
lung.
Link
Adaptations of the 
cells in the alveoli are 
discussed in detail 
in Chapter B2.3, 
page 266.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
277
 
■Adaptations of mammalian lungs for gas exchange
Alveolar structure and gaseous exchange
The lung tissue consists of the alveoli, arranged in clusters, each served by a tiny bronchiole. 
Bronchioles exist in a branched network, spreading out within the lung to provide an even 
distribution of alveoli. Alveoli have elastic connective tissue as an integral part of their walls 
(Figure B3.1.4). There are very many small alveoli in each lung – the small size and large number of 
alveoli provide a large surface area for gas exchange.
A capillary system wraps around the clusters of alveoli (Figure B3.1.4). The extensive capillary beds 
are an adaptation of the lungs for gas exchange, providing a large surface area for the diffusion 
of oxygen from the alveoli into the blood and carbon dioxide out of the blood into the alveoli. 
Each capillary is connected to a branch of the pulmonary artery and is drained by a branch of the 
pulmonary vein. The pulmonary circulation is supplied with deoxygenated blood from the right side 
of the heart and returns oxygenated blood to the left side of the heart to be pumped to the rest of 
the body. 
Common mistake
A common misunderstanding is that the spherical shape of alveoli gives the lungs a large surface 
area for gas exchange. In fact, a sphere has less surface area for a given volume than any other 
shape. It is the small size and large number of alveoli that gives the large surface area.
Surfactant lines the inner surface of the alveoli. It is secreted by cells in the wall of alveoli and 
reduces surface tension. Because of the tiny diameter of the alveoli (about 0.25 mm) they would tend 
to collapse under surface tension during expiration, with their walls sticking together. The lung 
surfactant lowers the surface tension, permitting the alveoli to flex easily as the pressure of the 
thorax falls and rises.
Top tip!
Make sure you know how the lung is adapted for gas exchange. The adaptions include: the 
presence of surfactant, a branched network of bronchioles, extensive capillary beds and a large 
surface area.
Blood arriving in the lungs is low in oxygen but high in carbon dioxide. As blood flows past the 
alveoli, gaseous exchange occurs by diffusion. Oxygen dissolves in the alveolar surface film of water, 
diffuses across into the blood plasma and into the red blood cells, where it chemically combines with 
haemoglobin to form oxyhaemoglobin. At the same time, carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood 
into the alveoli.
 
■Table B3.1.1 The composition of air in the lungs
Component
Inspired air/%
Alveolar air/%
Expired air/%
oxygen 
20.9
14
16
carbon dioxide
0.04
5.5
4.0
nitrogen
79
81
79
water vapour
variable
saturated
saturated
Common 
mistake
Do not refer to an 
‘alveolar membrane’ 
because this leads to 
confusion with cell 
plasma membranes. 
The term ‘wall’ is 
preferable. One of the 
adaptations of alveoli is 
that alveolar walls are 
one cell thick. Do not 
confuse ‘alveolar walls’ 
with ‘cell walls’.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
278
capillary
network
alveoli
branch of
pulmonary
artery
branch of
pulmonary
vein
movement
of air
cartilage
rings
branch of
bronchus
alveolus
bronchioles
elastic connective tissue
occurs around the alveoli
cartilage
rings
capillary with
blood cells
diffusion
surface film
of water
O2
CO2
alveolar
membrane
gaseous exchange in the alveolus
blood supply to alveoli
alveolus
wall
terminal
bronchiole
bands of overlapping
elastic fibres
On expiration
• the volume of the thorax
   decreases
• the alveolus and terminal
   bronchiole revert to resting 
   size, due to recoil of the 
   elastic fibres
• air is expelled
On inspiration
• the volume of the
   thorax increases
• the walls of the alveolus
   and terminal bronchiole
   are stretched
• air is drawn in 
role of elastic fibres in alveoli and bronchioles
  
position of
capillary wall
(endothelium)
position of
elastic fibres
capillary
red blood
cells 
alveolar wall
(squamous
epithelium)
alveolus
photomicrograph of TS alveoli, HP
 
■Figure B3.1.4 Gaseous exchange in the alveoli


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
279
How effective are mammalian lungs?
Air flow in the lungs of mammals is tidal: air enters and leaves by the same route. Consequently, 
there is a residual volume of air that cannot be expelled. Incoming air mixes with and dilutes the 
residual air, rather than replacing it. The effect of this is that air in the alveoli contains significantly 
less oxygen than the atmosphere outside (see Table B3.1.1). 
Nevertheless, the lungs are efficient organs. Their success is due to numerous features of the alveoli 
that adapt them to gaseous exchange. These are listed in Table B3.1.2.
 
■Table B3.1.2 Features of alveoli that adapt them to efficient gaseous exchange 
Feature
Effects and consequences
surface area of alveoli
a huge surface area for gaseous exchange 
(50 m2 = area of doubles tennis court)
alveolar wall
very thin, flattened (squamous) epithelium (5 µm) means the diffusion pathway is 
short
capillary supply to alveoli
network of capillaries around each alveolus (supplied with deoxygenated blood 
from the pulmonary artery and draining into pulmonary veins) maintains the 
concentration gradient of O2 and CO2 
surface film of moisture
O2 dissolves in water lining the alveoli; O2 diffuses into the blood in solution
surfactant producing
a detergent secreted by cells in the walls of alveoli; it reduces surface tension and 
stops alveoli walls from sticking together, keeping alveoli open
Common mistake
Be careful with word choice. It is not the alveolus that is one cell thick, but the alveolar wall.
	ATL B3.1A 
The production of adequate amounts of surfactant in the foetus, from about five months of 
pregnancy in humans, marks the beginning of the possibility of independent life. Premature 
babies born before this stage are unable to inflate their lungs and breathe; those born after it can 
do so and, with intensive care, can survive.
Find out about the effects of premature birth on babies. How are these effects treated? Use your 
biological knowledge to produce an information leaflet (of the type found in hospitals and 
doctors’ surgeries), which explains to the general public the problems caused by premature birth 
for babies and how these can be treated.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
2	 Outline how 
the structure of 
alveoli adapts them 
for efficient gas 
exchange.
Ventilation of the lungs
Air is drawn into the alveoli when the air pressure in the lungs is lower than atmospheric pressure. 
Air is then forced out when pressure is higher in the lungs than atmospheric pressure. Since the 
thorax is an airtight chamber, pressure changes in the lungs occur when the volume of the thorax 
changes. How the volume of the thorax is changed during breathing is illustrated in Figure B3.1.5 
and summarized in Table B3.1.3. 
Top tip!
Make sure you understand the role of the diaphragm, intercostal muscles, abdominal muscles and 
ribs in ventilation. Figure B3.1.5 and Table B3.1.3 describe the roles in detail.
Common 
mistake
A common 
misconception is that 
the gas breathed in 
is oxygen and the 
gas breathed out is 
carbon dioxide. The air 
breathed in and out 
contains both oxygen 
and carbon dioxide 
– exhaled air has a 
higher concentration 
of carbon dioxide 
than inhaled air, and 
inhaled air has a 
higher concentration 
of oxygen.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
280
air in
air out
backbone
(ribs articulate
with the thoracic
vertebrae)
trachea
bronchus
lung tissue
pleural
fluid
sternum
(most ribs
are attached
here by
cartilage)
diaphragm
inspiration:
• external
   intercostal
   muscles contract
• internal intercostal
   muscles relax
• diaphragm muscles
   contract
ribs moved
upwards and
outwards, and the
diaphragm down
expiration:
• external
   intercostal
   muscles relax
• internal intercostal
   muscles contract
• diaphragm muscles
   relax
ribs moved
downwards and
inwards, and the
diaphragm up
volume of the thorax (and therefore of the lungs) increases;
pressure is reduced below atmospheric pressure and air flows in
volume of the thorax (and therefore of the lungs) decreases;
pressure is increased above atmospheric pressure and air flows out
 
■Figure B3.1.5 The ventilation mechanism of the lungs
Top tip!
Be clear about which intercostal muscles you are referring to, i.e. internal or external. They are 
antagonistic muscles, so one is relaxing as the other contracts, and vice versa.
Common mistake
When describing ventilation, make sure you refer to changes of thoracic volume rather than 
changes in the lung volume.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
281
 
■Table B3.1.3 The mechanism of lung ventilation – a summary 
Inspiration (inhalation)
Structure/outcome
Expiration (exhalation)
muscles contract, flattening the 
diaphragm and pushing down on 
contents of abdomen
*diaphragm
muscles relax
relax
*abdominal muscles
contract – pressure from 
abdominal contents pushes 
diaphragm into a dome shape
contract, moving ribcage up and 
out
*external intercostal muscles
relax
relax
*internal intercostal muscles
contract, moving ribcage down 
and in
increases
volume of thoracic cavity
decreases
falls below atmospheric pressure
air pressure of thorax
rises above atmospheric pressure
in
air flow
out
*different muscles are required for inspiration and expiration because muscles only 
work when they contract – this is referred to as antagonistic muscle action.
Common mistake
Be careful with cause and effect when discussing ventilation of the lungs. For example, it is not the 
movement of air into the lungs that causes the diaphragm to move down, but rather the diaphragm 
contracting and moving down, which causes reduced pressure in the thoracic cavity and thus air to 
be drawn into the lungs.
3	 Compare the roles of the following muscles during ventilation of the lungs:
a	 the internal and external intercostal muscles
b	 the diaphragm and abdominal muscles.
Measurement of lung volumes
 
■Monitoring of ventilation in humans at rest and after exercise
One way of monitoring ventilation (the movement of air into and out of the lungs) is by data logging 
using an apparatus called a spirometer (Figure B3.1.6). In the diagram, you can see this consists 
of a plastic lid that moves up and down in the spirometer chamber. The plastic lid is hinged over a 
tank of water: when the person taking part in the experiment breathes into a mouthpiece, connected 
to the spirometer chamber by flexible tubing, the lid rises and falls as the volume of air in the 
chamber changes. 
With the spirometer chamber filled with air, the capacity of the lungs when breathing at different 
rates can be investigated. Note that if the spirometer chamber is filled with oxygen, and a carbon 
dioxide-absorbing chemical such as soda lime is added to a compartment on the air return circuit, 
this apparatus can also be used to measure oxygen consumption by the body.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
282
Note: If the spirometer is used
to record oxygen consumption,
then a carbon dioxide-absorbing
chemical is added here (and the
spirometer chamber is ﬁlled with
oxygen, not air).
A recording spirometer
is used to analyse the
pattern of change in lung
volume during breathing.
spirometer chamber
counterpoise
water
level
plastic lid
tank of
water
nose
clip
mouthpiece
The movements of the lid of the
airtight spirometer chamber are
recorded by a position transducer,
connecting box and computer.
The results (e.g. inspiratory
capacity and tidal volume) are
printed out using appropriate
control software.
 
■Figure B3.1.6 Investigating breathing with a spirometer. The nose clip is needed to ensure breathing 
is through the mouth and not through the nose. The arrows indicate the movement of air
The movements of the lid may be recorded by a position transducer, connecting the box to a 
computer. From ‘traces’ printed out from investigations of human breathing under different 
conditions (including at rest, and after mild and vigorous activity), ventilation rate and tidal volume 
may be measured. Figure B3.1.7 shows an example trace – examine it closely.
tidal volume
(increasing,
as during
exercise)
inspiratory
reserve
volume
maximum
expiratory
level
volume/dm3
vital
capacity
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
human lung capacity
time/ventilation rate
maximum inspiratory
level
expiratory
reserve
volume
 
■Figure B3.1.7 A spirometer trace
 
■Tidal volume and inspiratory and 
expiratory reserves
The volume of air breathed in and out during normal, relaxed, 
rhythmical breathing, the tidal volume, is typically 400–500 cm3 
(0.4–0.5 dm3). Tidal volume is the volume of air taken in and out 
with each inhalation or exhalation. However, we have the potential 
for an extra-large intake (maximum inspiratory capacity) and an 
extra-large expiration of air (expiratory reserve volume), when 
required. The difference between the maximum inspiratory level and 
the tidal volume is called the inspiratory reserve, and the difference 
between the maximum expiratory level and the tidal volume is called 
the expiratory reserve (Figure B3.1.7). These, together, make up 
about 4.5 dm3.
Top tip!
Make sure you know 
which measurements 
determine tidal 
volume, vital capacity, 
and inspiratory and 
expiratory reserves.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
283
 
■Vital capacity 
Vital capacity (VC) is the total amount of air exhaled after maximal inhalation. The value varies 
according to age, body size and level of regular physical activity. It is calculated by adding the tidal 
volume (TV), inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) and expiratory reserve volume (ERV). That is:
VC = TV + IRV + ERV
 
■Ventilation rate
The spirometer can also be used to investigate steady breathing over a short period of time and, in these 
cases, the y-axis of the spirometer trace is ‘time’. In this way, the rate at which the lungs are ventilated 
can be investigated. The ventilation rate is the number of inhalations or exhalations per minute. 
Alternative experimental approaches are possible, including the use of a chest belt and pressure 
monitor linked to a data logger.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Use data from an investigation on the effects of exercise on breathing rate. Describe 
the differences between the different levels of exercise. Explain the differences between 
each experiment, using your biological knowledge. Why did breathing rate increase 
under more intense exercise? (What metabolic process is increasing in cells, and how 
do the products formed increase breathing rate/depth? Why must breathing rate/depth 
increase?) Use as many different synoptic ideas from the course (i.e. subject knowledge 
from different parts of the syllabus) as you can think of to explain your results.
Evaluating
What were the limitations of the experiment? How would they have affected the 
accuracy of the result? How could you have improved the experiment to reduce these 
limitations and improve accuracy?
Why did you repeat the experiment? (Hint: this enables you to comment on reliability 
and identify any anomalous results.) What is standard deviation, and what does this tell 
you about your results? (Hint: i.e. variation around the mean.)
If you were to carry out another experiment investigating the effect of exercise on 
ventilation, what improvements could you make? Describe an experiment and explain 
the improvements you have made.
Gas exchange in plants
 
■Adaptations for gas exchange in leaves
The leaf is the plant organ where gas exchange occurs. The top and bottom of the leaf are covered by 
a single layer of cells, the epidermis, and the inner part of the leaf contains mesophyll tissue and 
vascular tissue in a system of vascular bundles (Figure B3.1.8). The vascular bundles in leaves are 
referred to as veins. The bulk of the leaf is taken up by mesophyll tissue and the cells here are 
supported by veins arranged in a branching network. There are two types of mesophyll cells: the 
palisade mesophyll, which form a single layer of cells towards the top of the leaf and are full of 
chloroplasts to maximize photosynthesis, and the spongy mesophyll, which contain air spaces 
where gas exchange occurs. 
	
◆Tidal volume: volume 
of air normally exchanged 
in breathing.
	
◆Inspiratory reserve: 
difference between the 
maximum inspiratory level 
and the tidal volume.
	
◆Expiratory reserve: 
difference between the 
maximum expiratory level 
and the tidal volume.
	
◆Vital capacity (VC): 
the total amount of air 
exhaled after maximal 
inhalation.
	
◆Ventilation rate: 
number of inhalations or 
exhalations per minute.
	
◆Epidermis: outer 
layer(s) of cells.
	
◆Mesophyll tissue: 
parenchyma cells 
containing chloroplasts.
	
◆Vascular tissue: xylem 
and phloem of plants.
	
◆Vascular bundle: 
strands of xylem and 
phloem (often with fibres) 
separated by cambium; 
the site of water and food 
movements up and down 
the stem.
	
◆Palisade mesophyll: 
columnar (oblong-
shaped) cells containing 
many chloroplasts found 
beneath the upper 
epidermis in leaves.
	
◆Spongy mesophyll: 
rounded cells in the leaf 
that are loosely packed, 
creating air spaces where 
air circulates, providing 
a large surface area for 
gas exchange; contains 
chloroplasts but fewer 
than palisade mesophyll.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
284
 
■Figure B3.1.8 The distribution of tissues in the leaf
photomicrograph of part
of a leaf in cross-section
(×120)
upper epidermis
waxy cuticle
palisade mesophyll
part of a vascular bundle in
section – running parallel to
the plane of section
spongy mesophyll
lower epidermis (contains
stomata)
plan diagram of leaf in cross-section
epidermis
vascular
bundles
of leaf
palisade
spongy
xylem
phloem
mesophyll
The tiny pores of the epidermis of leaves, through which gas exchange can occur, are known as 
stomata (Figure B3.1.9). Most stomata occur in the epidermis of leaves, but some do occur in stems. 
Each stoma is surrounded by two elongated guard cells. Guard cells change shape to open and close 
the stomata.
Common mistake
Do not confuse ‘guard cell’ with ‘stoma’. Guard cells create the stoma when they open to form a 
pore (or hole) between them (the stoma), through which gas exchange occurs. ‘Stoma’ should be 
used when referring to singular structures, and ‘stomata’ when referring to several.
Stomata open and close due to the change in turgor pressure of the guard cells. They open when 
water is absorbed by the guard cells from the surrounding epidermal cells. The guard cells then 
become fully turgid and they each push into the epidermal cell beside them (because of the 
way cellulose is laid down in the walls, Figure B3.1.9). A pore develops between the guard cells. 
When water is lost and the guard cells become flaccid, the pore closes again. 
	
◆Stoma (plural, 
stomata): pore in the 
epidermis of a leaf, 
surrounded by two 
guard cells.
	
◆Turgid: condition 
where the vacuole of 
a plant cell is full of 
water, pushing the cell 
membrane against the 
cell wall.
	
◆Flaccid: plant cell that 
has become soft and less 
rigid than normal because 
the cytoplasm within 
its cells has shrunk and 
contracted away from 
the cell walls through loss 
of water.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
285
air space
guard cell 
has thin 
lateral walls
but dorsal and
ventral walls are
greatly thickened
with cellulose
palisade
mesophyll
spongy
mesophyll
stomata mostly 
in lower 
epidermis
leaf vascular
bundle in section
upper
epidermis
photomicrograph of lower surface of leaf showing
distribution of stomata among the epidermal cells (×100)
photomicrograph of structure of individual stoma (×500)
spongy
mesophyll cells
ordinary
epidermal cell
guard cell has
thin lateral walls
thick outer wall
of epidermis
covered by waxy
cuticle
pore partially open
waxy 
cuticle
The adaptations of the leaf for gas exchange include:
l	 waxy cuticle: forms a largely impermeable barrier, so gases and water vapour must leave via the 
stomata on the underside of the leaf, allowing gas exchange and water loss to be controlled.
l	 epidermis: the lower epidermis contains many pores (stomata) that facilitate gas exchange. 
Most of these are in the lower epidermis, away from the brightest sunlight, so that humidity and 
temperature is lower than they are above the leaf, to reduce water loss.
l	 air spaces: allow gases to circulate around the loosely packed spongy mesophyll cells, 
maintaining a concentration gradient between air and cells
l	 spongy mesophyll: provides a large surface area for gas exchange – carbon dioxide entering the 
cells and oxygen leaving
l	 stomatal guard cells: open and close to control gas exchange and water loss
l	 veins (vascular bundle): carry water to the leaves (in xylem vessels), which is then lost through 
stomata by the process of transpiration. Water is required for the process of photosynthesis – a 
small proportion of the water entering the leaf is used in photosynthesis – carbon dioxide is 
also needed, and so ongoing photosynthesis in the leaves, driven by water supply via veins and 
carbon dioxide through stomata, maintains concentration gradients of both molecules.
 
■Figure B3.1.9 The distribution 
and structure of stomata


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
286
Concept: Form
Further adaptations to increase gas exchange include:
l	 leaves provide a large surface area so that many stomata can be incorporated. 
Stomata allow movement of gases in and out of the air spaces inside the leaf to 
maintain a steep concentration gradient of carbon dioxide from the outside of the 
leaf to the inside 
l	 leaves are flat, which provides a large surface area-to-volume ratio 
l	 leaves are thin to facilitate fast diffusion of carbon dioxide to all cells.
 
■Distribution of tissues in a leaf
Figures B3.1.8 and B3.1.9 show the distribution of tissues in a leaf in relation to the adaptations to 
gas exchange. Figure B3.1.10 shows a summary of the different tissues within a dicotyledonous leaf.
palisade 
mesophyll
waxy
cuticle
upper
epidermis
xylem
phloem
vascular 
bundle
guard
cells
stoma
spongy
mesophyll
leaf blade
 
■Figure B3.1.10 Section through a typical leaf showing different tissues and cell structure
4	 Explain how a leaf is adapted for efficient gas exchange.
5	 Compare and contrast adaptations for gas exchange in mammalian lungs and in the 
leaves of plants.
Transpiration 
When stomata open for gas exchange, water vapour is lost from the leaf. Water vapour diffuses from the 
interior of the leaf to the air outside down a concentration gradient. The process of the loss of water 
vapour from leaves is called transpiration (Figure B3.1.11).
Transpiration is found to be dramatically affected by environmental conditions around the plant.
Common mistake
It is incorrect to say that ‘water’ diffuses from the leaf during transpiration: you need to say that 
water vapour diffuses through stomata.
Top tip!
Make sure you can 
draw and label a plan 
diagram to show the 
distribution of tissues 
in a transverse section 
of a dicotyledonous 
leaf, as shown in Figure 
B3.1.10, but not details 
of individual cells (as 
described later in 
this chapter).
	
◆Transpiration: the 
evaporation of water from 
the spongy mesophyll 
tissue and its subsequent 
diffusion through the 
stomata.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
287
Why is this so?
Transpiration occurs because water molecules 
evaporate from the cellulose walls of cells in the 
leaf continuously. This increases the water potential 
of the air spaces between mesophyll cells. If the 
air outside the plant has a lower water potential 
(i.e. it is less humid – as it very often is) and the 
stomata are open, then water vapour will diffuse out 
into the drier air outside, from a higher to lower 
water potential.
Common mistake
It is incorrect to refer to the movement of water 
molecules from a liquid state inside the leaf to 
the gases of the air outside as osmosis, because 
water is not travelling through a cell membrane 
(something that defines osmosis).
leaf stalk
guard cell
pore of stomata
leaf blade
waxy cuticle covers
epidermis – prevents
evaporation of water from
outer surfaces of plant
sunlight
xylem vessels in
stem (phloem
tissue omitted)
high concentration
of water vapour
in air spaces of leaf
air movements carry
water vapour away and
maintain the gradient
water drawn from xylem
vessels, replacing
water lost
diffusion of water
vapour to drier
air outside 
column of water drawn
up the xylem by the
evaporation in the leaves
 
■Figure B3.1.11 The site of transpiration
The following factors can affect the rate of transpiration:
l	 Temperature affects transpiration because it causes the evaporation of water molecules from the 
surfaces of the cells of the leaf. A rise in the concentration of water vapour within the air spaces 
increases the difference in concentration in water vapour between the leaf’s interior and the air 
outside, so diffusion is enhanced. In addition, water vapour molecules will move faster, resulting 
in faster diffusion. An increase in temperature of the leaf therefore raises the transpiration rate.
l	 High humidity slows transpiration. If humid air collects around a leaf, it decreases the difference 
in concentration of water vapour between the interior and exterior of the leaf, slowing diffusion of 
water vapour from the leaf. 
l	 Wind sweeps away the water vapour molecules accumulating outside the stomata of the 
epidermis of the leaf surface, enhancing the difference in concentration of water vapour between 
the leaf interior and the outside. Movements of air around the plant enhance transpiration.
l	 Light intensity affects transpiration because the stomata tend to be open in the light in order for 
carbon dioxide to diffuse into the leaf for the process of photosynthesis, at the same time 
resulting in the loss of water vapour from the leaf. Light from the Sun also contains infrared rays 
that warm the leaf and raise its temperature. Light is an essential factor for transpiration.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Potometers can be used to measure the rate of water 
uptake in plants (Figure B3.1.12).
The apparatus consists of a leafy shoot inserted into a 
tube (the seal must be airtight), which is attached to a 
capillary tube.
l	 The capillary is attached to a reservoir of water.
l	 The apparatus must be set up underwater to ensure 
that the column of water is continuous between the 
plant and the capillary.
l	 An air bubble is introduced into the capillary. As 
water transpires from the leaf, water is pulled up the 
tube and along the capillary. The rate of movement 
of the air bubble (distance moved per minute) is an 
indirect measure of transpiration rate (although not 
all the water entering the plant leaves it).
l	 The tap below the reservoir allows the bubble to be 
reset so that a new measurement can be made.

➜
Top tip!
Make sure you are 
aware of the factors 
affecting the rate of 
transpiration.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
288
Design an investigation into the effect of one abiotic 
variable (e.g. temperature, wind, humidity, light) on the 
rate of transpiration in plants. Consider these points:
l	 Which plant species will you use? (It must be one 
that fits into the potometer apparatus.)
l	 What will be your independent variable (the abiotic 
factor you will be changing)?
l	 What are your controlled variables (factors you will 
be keeping the same)? 
l	 How many repeats will you carry out to ensure that 
your results are reliable?
l	 A potometer does not measure transpiration directly; 
it measures the rate of water uptake by the cut stem. 
How would this affect the conclusions of a study using 
a potometer to investigate the effects of environmental 
conditions on the loss of water from plants?
capillary tube
(1 mm in diameter)
as water is drawn into the plant
a meniscus appears here and
moves along the capillary tube
Readings are taken of the
movement of the meniscus
in a given time.
There are various designs of potometer – all operating in a similar way,
on the same principles. The potometer may be set up under different
environmental conditions (e.g. light v. dark; low v. high temperature;
moving v. still air), and the rate of transpiration measured.
water drawn up the
stem to replace the
water transpired
leafy shoot (loses
water vapour to air)
rubber
connection
tap (closed)
water reservoir
(the capillary tube is recharged
with water from here)
 
■Figure B3.1.12 Investigating transpiration and the factors that influence it
TOK
Consider how behaving 
like a ‘biologist’ means 
being able to perform 
certain skills. This 
type of knowledge 
is ‘ability knowledge’ 
and something you 
can analyse in your 
TOK course.
Top tip!
A potometer measures water uptake rather than water loss. The rate of uptake of water will not 
be the same as the rate of transpiration; some of the water (around 5%) remains in the plant 
for photosynthesis and to keep the cells turgid. The rest (95%) is lost from the plant through 
transpiration. The difference between water uptake and water loss can be important for a large 
tree, but for a small shoot in a potometer the difference is usually trivial and can be ignored.
Top tip! 
When explaining the effect of environmental factors on transpiration rate, make sure you refer to 
concentration gradients. The air spaces inside the leaf are at or close to saturation with water 
vapour. High humidity in the air outside stomata will reduce the concentration gradient between 
the air spaces in the leaf and the air outside, because the air will be as saturated with water as 
the inside of the leaf. Wind, in contrast, leads to a steeper concentration gradient between the air 
spaces and the air outside, increasing the transpiration rate.
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Accurately measuring time
The SI unit for time is the second (s). Other units are the hour (h) and the minute (min). 
Time is usually measured in the laboratory with a digital stop watch for accuracy.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.1   Gas exchange
289
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Physical modelling
Models of water transport in the xylem, and 
demonstrations of the power and inevitability of 
evaporation from moist surfaces, can be designed and 
tested using familiar laboratory equipment.
Design a model that represents transpiration in plants. 
You could use the model to carry out the investigation 
you designed, using a potometer, to measure the 
effects of an abiotic variable on transpiration rate.
Here are some ideas for equipment you could use.
l	 Porous pot
l	 models evaporation from leaves
l	 water fills the clay of the pot, demonstrating 
adhesive forces 
l	 as water is drawn into the porous pot, cohesive 
forces are demonstrated as water moves up the 
capillary tube attached to the pot.
l	 Capillary tubing
l	 demonstrates cohesive and adhesive forces in xylem
l	 water binds to the side of the tubing, 
demonstrating adhesive forces
l	 water is drawn up the capillary, demonstrating 
cohesive forces.
l	 Filter or blotting paper
l	 models evaporation from leaves.
	ATL B3.1B 
Stomata tend to open in daylight and be closed in the dark. 
This diurnal pattern is overridden, however, if the plant 
becomes short of water and starts to wilt. For example, 
in very dry conditions when there is an inadequate water 
supply, stomata inevitably close relatively early in the day 
(turgor cannot be maintained). This limits water vapour loss 
by transpiration and halts further wilting. Adequate water 
reserves from the soil may be taken up subsequently, thereby 
allowing the opening of stomata again the following day. The 
effect of this mechanism is that stomata regulate transpiration 
by preventing excessive water loss (Figure B3.1.13).
Examine Figure B3.1.13. Suggest why the stomatal apertures 
of the plant in very dry conditions differed in both maximum 
size and duration of opening from those of the plant with 
adequate moisture.
relative average
stomatal aperture/
arbitrary units
midnight
midnight
noon
sunny day
(+ adequate moisture)
very dry conditions
time
how stomatal 
aperture
may vary
  
 
■Figure B3.1.13 Stomatal opening and environmental conditions
Stomatal density
The more stomata per unit area (stomatal density), the more carbon dioxide can be taken into the 
spongy mesophyll and the more water can be released by transpiration. Therefore, higher stomatal 
density can greatly increase both water loss and carbon dioxide uptake.
Stomatal density can be measured using micrographs of leaves or by using leaf casts, as shown on 
the next page. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
290
 
■Performing a leaf cast to determine stomatal density
1	 Take a bottle of nail varnish and a leaf.
2	 Spread nail varnish thinly on underside of a leaf (Figure B3.1.14).
3	 Leave varnish to dry – this can be accelerated by creating air 
currents over the leaf (by waving in the air or blowing on the leaf).
4	 Take a piece of transparent sticky tape and place it over the 
dried varnish.
5	 Slowly and carefully pull up the sticky tape from the leaf surface – 
this will pull a layer of varnish with it.
6	 Put tape sticky-side down on a slide.
7	 View the slide under a microscope – start with low power and 
then increase to see details of stomata.
8	 Count the number of stomata in the field of view. Work out the 
size of the field of view (put a ruler under the objective lens and 
use this to estimate the diameter of the area under view – the 
area can be calculated by using the formula π × r2, where r is the 
radius of the field of view).
9	 Measure the surface area of the leaf by tracing the outline on 
graph paper. Extrapolate the number of stomata in the field of 
view to the full surface area of the leaf.
 
■Figure B3.1.14 Making a leaf cast using nail varnish
 
■Variation in stomatal density between different species of plant
Plants are adapted to the environment they live in. One adaptation is the size and shape of stomata 
and the stomatal density (Figure B3.1.15).
 
A
—
—
—
—
B
C
D
 
■Figure B3.1.15 Clear 
differences in stomatal 
size and stomatal density 
can be observed between 
the four species of plant. 
Stomatal traits also 
vary between different 
species. (A) Arabidopsis 
thaliana and (B) Phaseolus 
vulgaris display ‘kidney-
shaped’ guard cells 
(coloured in green). The 
grasses (C) Oryza sativa 
and (D) Triticum aestivum 
show dumb-bell-shaped 
guard cells (solid green) 
and specialized subsidiary 
cells (light green 
gradient). Subsidiary cells 
may support guard cell 
function by offering a 
mechanical advantage 
that helps guard cell 
movements, and/or by 
acting as a reservoir 
for water and ions. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.1   Gas exchange
291
Nature of science: Measurements
Creating knowledge that can be relied upon is increased by 
repeating measurements
The level of trust we can place in quantitative data (numerical measurements with units) is 
increased by repeating measurements. All measurements are limited in precision and accuracy. 
Repeating measurements under identical conditions increases the reliability of quantitative data. 
In the case of measuring stomatal density, repeating the counts of the number of stomata visible in 
the field of view at high power illustrates the variability of biological material. Being able to compare 
data is crucial in the production of scientific knowledge. The results from a single counting may 
contain an error. However, if repeated measurements tend to return the same results, we say that 
the data are ‘reliable’; this is not the same thing as saying the data are ‘true’ but it does mean that 
we can rely on that data more when more measurements give us similar values.
TOK
In Theory of Knowledge, you will often see questions (IA Prompts or Essay Prescribed Titles) that 
refer to the ‘pursuit of knowledge’. This generally refers to the ‘Methods and Tools’ element of the 
Knowledge Framework. So, for example, you could explore this notion of ‘reliability’ as a feature 
of the scientific method: repeating experiments and finding that the results are similar each time 
suggests that the hypothesis being tested is something we can rely on.
Haemoglobin and the transport of oxygen
 
■Partial pressure of oxygen
As terrestrial animals living at or near sea level, we live at the bottom of a ‘column’ of air. 
The atmosphere that surrounds us exerts a significant pressure. The air we breathe is a mixture of 
gases and, in a gas mixture, each gas exerts a pressure. In fact, the pressure of a mixture of gases is 
the sum of the partial pressure of the component gases. Consequently, the pressure of a specific gas 
in a mixture of gases is called its partial pressure. The symbol for partial pressure is p, and the 
partial pressure for a gas (X) is pX. So, for example, pO2 denotes the partial pressure of oxygen.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying and using SI prefixes and units
Partial pressure is the mole fraction of the total gas pressure that is exerted by a particular 
gas. The SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa) and its multiple is the kilopascal (kPa).
What is the partial pressure of the oxygen in the air around us?
At sea level, the atmospheric pressure is typically about 101.3 kPa and air is 20.9% 
oxygen. So, the partial pressure of oxygen is given by:
101.3 × 20.9
100
 = 21.2 kPa
The significance of this figure is reflected in the properties of the respiratory pigment 
haemoglobin, which transports oxygen in the blood.
	
◆Partial pressure: the 
pressure of a specific gas 
in a mixture of gases.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
292
 
■Oxygen dissociation curves
Haemoglobin occurs in the red blood cells. Each red blood cell contains about 280 million molecules 
of haemoglobin. The haemoglobin molecule is built of four interlocking polypeptide subunits 
(Figure B3.1.16; see also Chapter B1.2, page 217). These subunits are composed of a large globular 
protein with a non-protein haem group attached, containing iron. One molecule of oxygen combines 
with each haem group, at the concentration of oxygen that occurs in our lungs. This means each 
haemoglobin molecule can transport four molecules of oxygen:
haemoglobin + oxygen → oxyhaemoglobin
	
Hb	
+	 4O2	 →	
HbO8
The affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen is measured experimentally by finding the percentage 
saturation with oxygen of blood exposed to air mixtures that contain different partial pressures of 
oxygen. The result is called an oxygen dissociation curve (Figure B3.1.16).
partial pressure of oxygen 
high affinity
at high pO2
→ oxygen binds
low affinity at high pO2
→ oxygen released
pO2/kPa
the dissociation curve of human haemoglobin
at body temperature
saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen/%
oxygen concentration/cm3 per 100 cm3 of blood
100
90
80
60
40
20
0
70
50
30
10
10
8
12
6
4
4
1
2
0
20
18
16
14
12
0
10
8
4
2
6
haemoglobin
four subunits interlocked
to form a compact molecule
a combination of protein and non-protein
means that haemoglobin is a conjugated
protein 
haem group
(non-protein)
globin (protein)
O2 retained here
 
■Figure B3.1.16 The structure of haemoglobin and its affinity for oxygen
The shape of haemoglobin is altered as each oxygen molecule binds, making each successive binding 
of oxygen easier. This is known as cooperative binding. As a result, haemoglobin has a higher 
affinity for oxygen in oxygen-rich areas (such as the air spaces in lung alveoli), promoting oxygen 
loading, and has a lower affinity for oxygen in oxygen-depleted areas (such as the muscles), 
promoting oxygen unloading (see Figure B3.1.16).
Notice that the oxygen dissociation curve is S-shaped (sigmoid curve). This tells us that, in the 
complex haemoglobin molecule, the first oxygen molecule attaches with difficulty but, once it has, 
the second combines more easily, and so on until all four are attached and the molecule is saturated. 
In other words, the amount of oxygen held by haemoglobin depends on the partial pressure of oxygen.
Top tip!
When haemoglobin saturation with oxygen is plotted as a function of the partial pressure of 
oxygen, a sigmoidal (or ‘S-shaped’) curve is seen. This indicates that the more oxygen is bound to 
haemoglobin, the easier it is for more oxygen to bind, until all binding sites are saturated.
	
◆Oxygen 
dissociation curve: 
graph of percentage 
saturation (with oxygen) 
of haemoglobin against 
concentration of available 
oxygen.
Concept: 
Function
The function of 
haemoglobin 
depends on 
whether it is 
exposed to oxygen-
rich or oxygen-
depleted areas. 
In the former it 
picks up oxygen 
and, in the latter, it 
unloads it.
	
◆Cooperative 
binding: process 
where the addition of a 
substance to the subunit 
of a macromolecule 
increases the affinity of a 
neighbouring subunit for 
the same substance.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.1   Gas exchange
293
What is the significance of the oxygen dissociation curve in the working body?
In the body the amount of oxygen held by haemoglobin depends on the partial pressure. In the 
lungs, air is saturated with water vapour, so the partial pressure of the component gases is different 
from that outside, in dry air (Table B3.1.4).
 
■Table B3.1.4 Partial pressures of the components of air in the alveoli
Component gases
Composition/%
Partial pressure/kPa
nitrogen
75.5
76.4
oxygen
13.1
13.3
carbon dioxide
5.2
5.3
water vapour
6.2
6.3
From the oxygen dissociation curve, we can see that the haemoglobin in red blood cells in the 
capillaries around the alveoli in the lungs will be about 95% saturated. However, in respiring tissues, 
the oxygen partial pressure is much lower due to aerobic respiration there. In fact, the oxygen partial 
pressure in actively respiring tissues may be 0.0–4.0 kPa. At these partial pressures, oxyhaemoglobin 
breaks down, releasing oxygen in solution that rapidly diffuses into the surrounding tissues. Clearly, 
the chemistry of haemoglobin makes it an efficient way of transporting oxygen, given the partial 
pressure of oxygen in respiring tissue compared with that in the lungs.
 
■Adaptations of foetal and adult haemoglobin for the transport 
of oxygen
10
8
partial pressure of oxygen pO2/kPa
12
6
4
2
100
foetal
haemoglobin
adult haemoglobin
14
0
saturation
with oxygen/%
80
60
40
20
0
foetal haemoglobin
 
■Figure B3.1.17 The oxygen dissociation curve of 
foetal haemoglobin compared to adult haemoglobin
The foetus obtains oxygen from its mother’s blood through the placenta, 
where the maternal and foetal circulations come very close together but do 
not mix. The haemoglobin of the adult mammal and the haemoglobin in 
the foetal circulation differ slightly in their molecular composition. Foetal 
haemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen (Figure B3.1.17). This means 
that the haemoglobin present in the circulation of the foetus combines with 
oxygen more readily than maternal haemoglobin does at the same partial 
pressure. Because foetal haemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen, the 
dissociation curve is shifted to the left. It is obvious why it is advantageous 
for foetal haemoglobin to have this property, given that the only access to an 
oxygen supply is via the placenta. Foetal haemoglobin will load oxygen when 
adult haemoglobin is unloading it (i.e. in the placenta). If foetal haemoglobin 
had a lower affinity than maternal haemoglobin, oxygen would pass from the 
foetus to the mother.
Following birth, foetal haemoglobin is almost completely replaced by adult haemoglobin.
We have already seen that the binding of oxygen to one of the subunits affects the interaction of 
oxygen with the other subunits (cooperative binding). This is because haemoglobin is an allosteric 
protein. The binding of oxygen to one haemoglobin subunit causes conformational changes that are 
relayed to the other subunits, making them more able to bind oxygen by raising their affinity for 
this molecule.
Carbon dioxide is an allosteric effector of haemoglobin. It attaches to haemoglobin, making it more 
difficult for oxygen to bind, lowering the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen. In foetal red blood 
cells, carbon dioxide has a lower allosteric effect, which leads to a higher affinity of oxygen for 
foetal haemoglobin.
	
◆Allosteric protein: a 
protein that can exist in 
multiple conformations 
(shapes) depending on 
the binding of a molecule 
(at a site other than the 
catalytic site).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
294
 
■Bohr shift
The blood circulation also transports carbon dioxide from 
respiring tissues, where it is at relatively high partial pressures, to 
the lungs. In respiring cells, the concentration of carbon dioxide 
is approximately 9.3 kPa, whereas in the lungs, as we have seen in 
Table B3.1.4, it is 5.3 kPa. The effects of these partial pressures of 
carbon dioxide on the oxygen dissociation curve of haemoglobin is 
noticeable (Figure B3.1.18).
An increase in carbon dioxide concentration shifts the oxygen 
dissociation curve to the right (see Figure B3.1.18). Where the 
carbon dioxide concentration is high (in the actively respiring 
cells), oxygen is released from oxyhaemoglobin even more readily. 
Carbon dioxide lowers the pH, caused by protons from the 
dissociation of carbonic acid, which causes haemoglobin to release 
its oxygen. This very useful outcome for living tissues is known as 
the Bohr effect.
the oxygen dissociation curve
of haemoglobin at the CO2
concentration of the blood in
transit around the body,
i.e. about 5.3 kPa CO2
the oxygen dissociation curve
of haemoglobin at the CO2
concentration around respiring
cells, i.e. about 9.3 kPa CO2
as the CO2 concentration
increases, more O2 is
released from haemoglobin
(Bohr effect)
pO2 in
lungs
pO2 in
respiring
cells
saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen/%
100
80
60
40
20
0
10
30
50
70
90
15
35
55
10
8
12
6
4
4
1
2
0
2.7
partial pressure of
oxygen pO2/kPa 
 
■Figure B3.1.18 How carbon dioxide favours 
release of oxygen in respiring tissues
	
◆Bohr effect: the 
decrease in the oxygen 
affinity of haemoglobin 
in response to decreased 
blood pH, resulting from 
increased carbon dioxide 
concentration in the blood.
An increase in carbon dioxide causes increased dissociation of oxygen. This benefits cells with 
increased metabolism, such as respiring tissues, in the following ways:
l	 greater amounts of carbon dioxide (a product of cell respiration) are released 
l	 haemoglobin releases its oxygen (required for aerobic cell respiration) at regions of greatest 
respiratory need.
	ATL B3.1C 
Marine mammals, such as whales and seals, must hold their breath for long periods as they dive 
beneath the surface of water to hunt for food. What would you predict about the concentrations 
of haemoglobin in their blood compared to land mammals?
Research the levels of haemoglobin in a marine mammal of your choice. How do they compare to 
those in land mammals? This article discusses some of the issues:  
www.nature.com/articles/news.2007.385
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
6	 Deduce the change in percentage saturation of haemoglobin if the oxygen partial 
pressure drops from 4.0 kPa to 2.7 kPa when the partial pressure of CO2 is 5.3 kPa 
(Figure B3.1.18).
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How do multicellular organisms solve the problem of access to materials for all their cells?
2	 What is the relationship between gas exchange and metabolic processes in cells? 
