B3.2   Transport
295
B3.2
Transport
•	 What adaptations facilitate transport of fluids in animals and plants?
•	 What are the differences and similarities between transport in animals and plants?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B3.2.1 	 Adaptations of capillaries for exchange of materials between blood and the 
internal or external environment
	 B3.2.2 	 Structure of arteries and veins
	 B3.2.3 	 Adaptations of arteries for the transport of blood away from the heart
	 B3.2.4 	 Measurement of pulse rates
	 B3.2.5 	 Adaptations of veins for the return of blood to the heart
	 B3.2.6 	 Causes and consequences of occlusion of the coronary arteries
	 B3.2.7 	 Transport of water from roots to leaves during transpiration
	 B3.2.8 	 Adaptations of xylem vessels for transport of water
	 B3.2.9 	 Distribution of tissues in a transverse section of the stem of a 
dicotyledonous plant
	 B3.2.10 	 Distribution of tissues in a transverse section of the root of a dicotyledonous plant
	 B3.2.11 	 Release and reuptake of tissue fluid in capillaries (HL only)
	 B3.2.12 	 Exchange of substances between tissue fluid and cells in tissues (HL only)
	 B3.2.13 	 Drainage of excess tissue fluid into lymph ducts (HL only)
	 B3.2.14 	 Differences between the single circulation of bony fish and the double 
circulation of mammals (HL only)
	 B3.2.15 	 Adaptations of the mammalian heart for delivering pressurized blood to the 
arteries (HL only)
	 B3.2.16 	 Stages in the cardiac cycle (HL only)
	 B3.2.17 	 Generation of root pressure in xylem vessels by active transport of mineral ions 
(HL only)
	 B3.2.18 	 Adaptations of phloem sieve tubes and companion cells for translocation of sap 
(HL only)
An introduction to the blood system
Living cells require a supply of water and nutrients, such as glucose and amino acids, and they need 
oxygen. The waste products of cellular metabolism must be removed. In single-celled organisms and 
very small organisms, internal distances are small, so movements of nutrients can occur efficiently by 
diffusion. In larger organisms, an internal transport system is required to meet the needs of the cells. 
Internal transport systems at work are examples of mass flow. 
There are three types of vessel in the circulation system:
l	 arteries – carry blood away from the heart
l	 veins – carry blood back to the heart
l	 capillaries – fine networks of tiny tubes linking arteries and veins.
	
◆Mass flow: the 
movement of fluids down 
a pressure gradient.
Theme B 
Form and function – Organisms


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
296
Adaptations of capillaries
Capillaries are the smallest blood vessel (Figure B3.2.1).
Capillaries serve the tissues and cells of the body. Blood is under lower pressure (about 
35 mm Hg) to prevent the walls of the capillaries bursting. They are narrow tubes, about 
the diameter of a single red blood cell (approximately 8 μm). Because of the low blood 
pressure, the flow rate of blood is reduced, which increases the rate of exchange of 
molecules between blood and tissue. 
Adaptations of capillaries for effective exchange of materials between the blood plasma 
and tissue fluid include:
l	 a large surface area due to branching (to increase diffusion)
l	 narrow diameters (so that red blood cells are in close contact with the capillary wall 
to reduce diffusion distance)
l	 thin walls (single layer of endothelial cells) for fast diffusion
l	 fenestrations (gaps in the wall) in some capillaries where exchange needs to be 
particularly rapid; these gaps are sufficient to allow some components of the blood to 
escape and contribute to tissue fluid (page 310).
The walls of the capillaries consist of endothelium only (endothelium is the innermost 
lining layer of arteries and veins – see below). Capillaries branch abundantly and bring 
the blood circulation close to cells – no cell is far from a capillary.
	
◆Endothelium: the 
innermost lining layer of 
arteries and veins, and the 
layer of cells that comprise 
the capillary; also lines the 
inside of the heart.
	
◆Lumen: the hollow 
interior of a blood vessel, 
through which the 
blood passes.
Structure of arteries and veins
Both arteries and veins have strong, elastic walls, but the walls of the arteries are very much 
thicker and stronger than those of the veins (Figure B3.2.2). The strength of the walls comes from 
the thickness of the wall and collagen fibres present, and the elasticity is due to the elastic and 
involuntary (smooth) muscle fibres. Compared to the thickness of the wall, the lumen of an artery is 
relatively small compared to the lumen of a vein – this enables to the pressure inside the artery to be 
maintained. The large lumen of a vein reduces friction between blood cells and the wall of the vessel, 
enabling the blood to flow freely under low pressure.
middle layer (tunica media)
of elastic fibres, collagen
and smooth
muscle fibres
endothelium
(inner lining) of squamous
epithelium – single layer
of cells with smooth inner
surface
outer layer (tunica
externa) of elastic fibres
and collagen
the hollow centre of
a tube is the lumen
artery
vein
 
■Figure B3.2.2 The structure of the wall of arteries and veins
TS artery and vein, LP (×20) – in sectioned material 
(as here), veins are more likely to appear squashed, 
whereas arteries are circular in section
endothelium
a cross section of a capillary
 
■Figure B3.2.1 Structure of a capillary
substances leave (and
enter) capillaries
through the walls
basement
membrane
endothelial cells
b three-dimensional view of a 
capillary wall (enlarged) 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
297
Look at Figure B3.2.2. The micrograph indicates distinguishing features between arteries and veins, 
for example, the thickness of the vessel wall relative to the diameter of the lumen. Arteries have a 
much thicker wall compared to the vein.
Concept: Form and function
The form of a blood vessel is related to its function – arteries have thick walls to 
withstand high pressure whereas veins have thinner walls because blood is at a lower 
pressure; veins also contain valves to stop blood backflow. Capillary walls are one cell 
thick to ensure fast diffusion.
1	 Construct a 
table showing 
the similarities 
and differences 
between arteries 
and veins.
 ATL B3.2A 
Endothelins are peptide-based hormones with receptors and effects in many organs in the human 
body. Endothelins constrict blood vessels and raise blood pressure. The endothelins are normally 
kept in balance by other mechanisms but, when overexpressed, can result in health issues. 
Carry out your own research on endothelins. How do they contribute to high blood pressure 
(hypertension), heart diseases and cancer? Produce a poster or PowerPoint to present to your 
class. In your talk, explain how different types of biological knowledge are required to understand 
how endothelins function and what happens when they fail to work properly.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Top tip!
Thick walls in 
arteries are needed 
to withstand high 
blood pressures; 
elasticity is to help 
maintain and even out 
blood pressure.
Blood leaving the heart is under high pressure and travels in waves or pulses, following each 
heartbeat. By the time the blood has reached the capillaries, it is under very much lower pressure, 
without a pulse. This difference in blood pressure accounts for the differences in the walls of 
arteries and veins (see below). Figure B3.2.2 shows an artery and vein in section and details the 
wall structure of these two vessels. In sectioned material, veins are more likely to appear squashed, 
whereas arteries are circular in section. Examine Figure B3.2.2 carefully so that you can identify 
these vessels in cross-section by their wall structure.
Adaptations of arteries for the transport 
of blood away from the heart
The main artery that leaves the heart is called the aorta, which takes blood from the heart to the 
head and rest of the body. Blood pressure in the aorta is very high – about 120 mm Hg.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying and using SI or non-SI metric units
The SI unit pascal (Pa) and its multiple, the kilopascal (kPa), are generally used 
by scientists to measure pressure. However, in medicine,  the older, non-SI unit of 
millimetres of mercury (mm Hg) is still used (1 mm Hg = 0.13 kPa). It refers to the 
height of a column of mercury that can be supported by the pressure being measured.
Arteries that divide from the aorta distribute blood under high pressure to regions of the body and 
to the main organs. The layers of muscle and elastic tissue in the walls of arteries help them to 
withstand and maintain high blood pressures.
	
◆Aorta: main artery 
that carries blood away 
from the heart to the rest 
of the body.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
298
The adaptations of the arteries include:
l	 overall wall thickness/muscle layer thickness to withstand blood pressure and prevent rupture of 
artery wall
l	 thick layer of elastic tissue to even out and maintain blood pressure
l	 walls stretch to accommodate the huge surge of blood when ventricles contract
l	 elastic tissue and collagen fibres of the tunica externa (outer layer – Figure B3.2.2) prevent 
rupture as blood surges from the heart
l	 the high proportion of elastic fibres are first stretched and then recoil, keeping the blood flowing 
and propelling it forwards after each pulse passes
l	 with increasing distance from the heart, the tunica media (middle layer) progressively contains 
more smooth muscle fibres and less elastic tissue as less stretching and recoiling occurs due to 
smaller differences in blood pressure
l	 by varying constriction and dilation of arteries, blood flow is maintained
l	 muscle fibres stretch and recoil, tending to even out the pressure, but a ‘pulse’ can still 
be detected.
Arteries divide into smaller blood vessels called arterioles, which deliver blood to the tissues. 
Arterioles have a high proportion of smooth muscle fibres, so are able to regulate blood flow from 
arteries into capillaries.
Measurement of pulse rates
Ventricular contractions of the heart force a wave of blood through the arteries. The expansion of the 
arteries can be felt as a pulse, particularly where the artery is near the skin surface and passes over a 
bone. The pulse is traditionally taken above the wrist (Figure B3.2.4).
To take a pulse you should use two fingers to compress 
the artery. After you have found the pulse, you need to 
count to determine the heart rate in beats per minute. 
You can either count for a full minute (this is the most 
accurate method) or count for 30 seconds and multiply 
by 2. The pulse can either be taken from a radial artery 
above the wrist (Figure B3.2.4) or from a carotid artery 
on the neck (Figure B3.2.3).
The carotid artery is located below the ear, on the side of 
the neck directly below the jaw. You should feel the 
artery as you exert pressure on the neck (Figure B3.2.3).
 ATL B3.2B 
Practise determining a person’s heart rate by feeling the carotid or radial pulse with fingertips. 
Take the pulse of a volunteer in your class. Which method is easier – measuring the pulse using 
the radial or carotid artery? 
There are also digital methods of measuring your pulse. For example, you could use a data logger, 
or some smartwatches and fitness bands measure heart rate by scanning blood flow near your 
wrist, by illuminating it with LEDs. Compare the traditional methods with digital ones: what are 
the advantages and disadvantages of both methods?
	
◆Arteriole: a very small 
artery.
 
■Figure B3.2.3 
Taking a pulse from 
a carotid artery
radial artery
 
■Figure B3.2.4 Taking a radial pulse
Top tip!
Do not use your 
thumb to take a pulse, 
because it has its 
own pulse that you 
may feel.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
299
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data; processing data
Carry out an investigation of the effect of exercise on 
heart rate. Select a range of different activities, from 
gentle to more active. Do not forget to measure resting 
heart rate as well.
Select your method for measuring heart rate (either by 
taking the pulse rate directly – see ATL box above – or 
using electronic methods).
How many times will you repeat the investigation, and 
why? How will you control other variables? 
Collect your data and plot your results using an 
appropriate graph.
Interpreting results 
Identify, describe and explain any patterns, trends or 
relationships you have recorded. Were any of your 
results anomalous? How do you identify and justify the 
removal or inclusion of outliers in data? 
Now assess the accuracy, precision, reliability and 
validity of your data.
Adaptations of veins for the 
return of blood to the heart
Because of the low pressure in veins there is a possibility of backflow. Veins have valves at intervals 
that prevent this (Figure B3.2.5). Pressure from the blood opens the valves, which are made from a 
strong protein called collagen and other material. At the end of a heart contraction, as the blood tries 
to flow backwards, blood pressure pushes against the valves causing them to close (Figure B3.2.5). 
This ensures that blood only moves in one direction, back towards the heart.
Valves are also found in the heart (see page 316).
blood flow back
to the heart
valve is opened by
blood pressure
from behind
pressure from
movements of the
surrounding tissues,
including contractions
of the muscles, which
compresses the vein
blood flow
reversed
valve is closed by
blood pressure
from in front
Valves are especially
common in the
veins of the limbs.
 
■Figure B3.2.5 Valves in veins prevent backflow of blood
Veins have thin walls, with the external layer (tunica externa, with elastic and collagen fibres) 
the thickest layer. The middle layer (tunica media) contains a few elastic fibres and muscle fibres; 
because of the low blood pressure, these do not need to be extensive. The wall of the vein is flexible, 
which allows surrounding muscles to compress the vein (Figure B3.2.5). This helps to keep the 
blood moving.
Blood flows into veins from smaller vessels called venules, which collect blood from the tissues. 
Venules are formed by a union of several capillaries and have a blood pressure of about 15 mm Hg. 
Veins have the lowest blood pressure of any blood vessel – approximately 5 mm Hg. 
	
◆Venule: branch of 
a vein.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
300
Causes and consequences of occlusion 
of the coronary arteries
Occlusion means the blockage or closing of a blood vessel. Diseases of the heart and blood vessels 
are primarily due to a condition called atherosclerosis (Figure B3.2.6), which causes the occlusion 
of the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle (the coronary arteries). This results in the 
progressive degeneration of the artery walls. The structure of a healthy artery wall is shown in 
Figure B3.2.2 (page 296).
plaque
blood clot = thrombus
formed where atheroma
has broken through the
endothelium
endothelium
endothelium
flow of blood
diseased
healthy
 
■Figure B3.2.6 Atherosclerosis, leading to a thrombus
Healthy arteries have pale, smooth linings, and the walls are elastic and flexible, as seen at the top of 
Figure B3.2.6. 
The steps to atherosclerosis in arteries are:  
l	 Damage to the artery walls as fatty tissue is deposited under the endothelium. These atheromas 
(fatty deposits) significantly reduce the diameter of the lumen.
l	 Raised blood pressure follows when fat deposits and fibrous tissue start to impede blood flow, 
leading to damage to the arterial wall.
l	 The damaged region is repaired with fibrous tissue, which significantly reduces the elasticity of 
the vessel wall.
l	 Lesion formation occurs when the smooth lining of the arteries breaks down. These lesions are 
known as atherosclerotic plaques. 
l	 If the plaque ruptures, blood clotting is triggered. A blood clot formed within a blood vessel is 
known as a thrombus. When a thrombus breaks free and circulates in the bloodstream, it is 
then called an embolus.  
 
■The consequences of atherosclerosis
One likely outcome of atherosclerotic damage to major arteries is that an embolus may be swept 
into a small artery or arteriole, which is narrower than the diameter of the clot, causing a blockage. 
Immediately, the blood supply to the tissue downstream of the block is deprived of oxygen, and 
without oxygen tissues die. The coronary arteries (the arteries that supply blood to the heart) are 
especially vulnerable – particularly those going to the left ventricle. When sufficient heart muscle 
dies in this way, the heart may cease to be an effective pump. We say a ‘heart attack’ has occurred 
(known as a myocardial infarction).
	
◆Atherosclerosis: 
deposition of plaque 
(cholesterol derivative) 
in the inner wall of 
blood vessels.
photomicrograph of diseased human artery in TS
artery wall
blood flow impeded 
by massive atheroma
Common 
mistake
The plaque does not 
deposit on the wall of 
the artery but within 
it. The plaque forms 
beneath the damaged 
endothelium.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
301
Coronary arteries that have been damaged can be surgically bypassed – known as a heart bypass 
operation. Typically, a blood vessel taken from the patient’s leg is used. In some cases, multiple 
bypasses are required. This operation is increasingly common and survival rates are high. 
An adult human on a low-cholesterol diet forms about 800 mg of cholesterol in the liver each day. 
However, diets high in saturated fatty acids (i.e. animal fats) often lead to abnormally high blood-
cholesterol levels. Excess blood cholesterol, present as LDL (page 402), may cause atherosclerosis – the 
progressive degeneration of the artery walls. A direct consequence of this is an increased likelihood of the 
formation and circulation of blood clots, leading to strokes and heart attacks (Figure B3.2.6, opposite).
Claims about links between health problems and causes are based on:
l	 epidemiological studies – these provide circumstantial evidence of health risks; they suggest 
connections, but they do not establish a cause or biochemical connection (Figure B3.2.7)
l	 clinical studies of individual patients with health problems attempt to show causal relations 
between diseases and diets (however, it is not possible to carry out ‘controlled’ experiments for 
ethical reasons).
5
0
10
15
20
25
deaths from CHD per 10 000 males
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Correlation study concerning saturated fat intake and the incidence of CHD
saturated fat intake / % of dietary energy
(Since these data were collated,
the former Yugoslavia has 
become Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia,
Montenegro, Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and
Slovenia.)
United States
Yugoslavia
Italy
Greece
Japan
Finland
Netherlands
0
10 
20
30
40
60
70
80
50
90
100
head diameter/mm
5
4
3
2
1
0
body length/mm
0
10 
20
30
40
saturated oxygen concentration/mg dm–3
10
8
6
4
temperature/°C
Understanding correlations – the differences between a positive correlation (left) and a negative 
correlation (right)
 
■Figure B3.2.7 Correlation studies – diet and coronary heart disease (CHD)
A study on the incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) related to saturated fat intake as a 
percentage of dietary energy (Figure B3.2.7) showed a positive correlation.
2	 Evaluate whether 
data in Figure 
B3.2.7 show 
a correlation 
between saturated 
fat intake and 
the incidence of 
coronary heart 
disease.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
302
There are marked variations in the prevalence of different health problems in societies around the 
world from claims based on epidemiological studies and clinical studies of individual patients with 
health problems. Health claims about the incidence of coronary heart disease need to be assessed in 
context. The issues continue to present complex challenges for dieticians and politicians in all 
societies. Even strong correlations, such as that between saturated fat intake and coronary heart 
disease, do not prove a causal link.
Top tip!
When evaluating (that is, making an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations) the 
evidence and the methods used to obtain the evidence for the incidence of coronary heart disease, 
you should use the following approach:
Strengths: whether there is a statistically significant correlation, for example between intake 
of saturated fat and incidence of CHD; there is comparison of mean values and analysis of how 
different they are; statistical assessment of any difference is carried out; analysis of variation within 
the data is done (i.e. how widely spread the data are, which can be assessed by the spread of data 
points or the relative size of error bars, where the more widely spread the data the smaller the 
significance that can be placed on the correlation and conclusion).
Limitations: whether the measure of health was a valid one, e.g. cholesterol levels in blood are 
more informative than body mass index; a smaller sample is less reliable than a larger one; the 
sample does not reflect the population as a whole, but rather a particular sex, age, state of health, 
lifestyle or ethnic background; data are gathered from animal trials rather than humans trials, and so 
may be less applicable to humans; certain variables are not controlled, e.g. other aspects of the diet; 
levels and frequency of the lipid intake being investigated are not realistic; methods used to gather 
data were rigorous, e.g. if only a survey was used, how truthful were the respondents?
Tool 3: Mathematics 
Understanding direct and inverse proportionality between variables
A causal relationship is suggested by statistical studies 
of deaths from coronary heart disease (CHD) per 
1000 of the population each year, plotted against the 
levels of cholesterol measured in blood serum (Figure 
B3.2.8). The establishment of the role of cholesterol 
in triggering CHD was provided by experimental 
laboratory and clinical evidence that destructive 
plaques (see page 300) are created as a result of these 
raised levels of blood serum cholesterol.
1	 Describe the trends shown in the graph, for both the 
bar and line graph.
2	 Explain to what extent the data in Figure B3.2.8 
supports the hypothesis that high blood cholesterol is 
a causal factor in CHD.
6
deaths from CHD per 1000 each year
14
12
10
8
13
11
9
7
occurrence
4.1–4.8
4.9–5.6
serum cholesterol/ mmol l–1
5.7–6.4
6.5–7.2
7.3–8.0
8.1–8.8
8.9–9.6
0
40
30
20
10
35
25
15
5
the bar graph records the frequency of 
occurrence of UK males (aged 44–64) with 
serum cholesterol at a range of levels from low 
(4.1–4.8 mmol l–1) to high (8.9–9.6 mmol l–1)
the line graph records the number of deaths in 
the UK from CHD, per 1000 people, per year, 
within the bands of serum cholesterol levels shown
 
■Figure B3.2.8 The relationship between deaths caused by coronary heart disease (CHD) and blood serum cholesterol levels. 
Nature 
of science: 
Patterns and 
trends
Correlation coefficients 
quantify correlations 
between variables and 
allow the strength 
of the relationship 
to be assessed. Low 
correlation coefficients 
or lack of any 
correlation can provide 
evidence against a 
hypothesis, but even 
strong correlations 
do not prove a causal 
link, as discussed 
above in relation to the 
incidence of coronary 
heart disease. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
303
Transport of water from roots to 
leaves during transpiration
Transpiration is the evaporation of water from the spongy mesophyll tissue and its subsequent 
diffusion through the stomata, mainly from the leaves of the green plant (Chapter B3.1, page 286). 
This loss of water vapour is the inevitable consequence of gas exchange in the leaf. The plant must 
transport water from the roots to the leaves to replace losses from transpiration.
Each part of a plant has a specific role:
l	 The stem supports the leaves in the sunlight and transports organic materials (such as sucrose 
and amino acids), ions and water between the roots and leaves. 
l	 The root anchors the plant and is the site of absorption of water and ions from the soil.
l	 A leaf is an organ specialized for photosynthesis and consists of a leaf blade connected to the 
stem by a leaf stalk.
 
■The transpiration stream
The water that evaporates from the walls of the mesophyll cells of the leaf is continuously replaced. 
It comes, in part, from the cell cytoplasm, but mostly it comes from the water in the spaces in walls 
of nearby cells and then from the xylem vessels in the network of vascular bundles nearby. The loss 
of water by transpiration from cell walls in leaf cells causes water to be drawn out of xylem vessels 
and through walls by capillary action. 
Xylem vessels are usually full of water. As water leaves the xylem vessels in the leaf, a tension 
(negative pressure potential) is set up in the entire water column in the xylem tissue of the plant. 
This tension draws water up in the xylem. The tension is transmitted down the stem to the roots 
because of the cohesion of water molecules. Cohesion and adhesion ensures a continuous column of 
water. Consequently, under tension, the water column does not break or pull away from the sides of 
the xylem vessels. This explanation of how water is drawn up the stem is known as the cohesion–
tension theory. The result is that water is drawn (literally ‘pulled’) up the stem. So, water flow in the 
xylem is always upwards. The flow of water is known as the transpiration stream.
The tension on the water column in xylem vessels is demonstrated experimentally when a xylem 
vessel is pierced by a fine needle. Immediately, a bubble of air enters the column (and will interrupt 
water flow). If the contents of the xylem vessel had been under pressure, a jet of water would be 
released from broken vessels. 
 ATL B3.2C 
Evidence of the cohesion–tension 
theory comes from measurement of the 
diameter of a tree trunk over a 24-hour 
period. In a large tree, there is an easily 
detectable shrinkage in the diameter of 
the trunk during the day. Under tension, 
xylem vessels get narrower in diameter 
(although their collapse is prevented by 
the lignified thickening of their walls). 
The diameter of the tree trunk recovers 
during the night when transpiration 
virtually stops, and water uptake makes 
good the earlier losses of water vapour 
from the aerial parts of the plant.
Explain to what extent the graph in Figure B3.2.9 supports the cohesion–tension 
theory of water movement in stems.
1200
daily variations in
diameter/arbitrary units
1800
2400
The data were obtained in early May. The tree trunk is undergoing secondary growth in girth during
the experimental period. The maximum daily shrinkage amounted to nearly 5 mm.
0600
1200
1800
2400
0600
1200
1800
2400
0600
1200
1800
2400
0600
1200
1800
2400
0600
1200
1800
2400
0600
1200
1800
2400
0600
 
■Figure B3.2.9 Diurnal changes in the circumference of a tree over a 7-day period
Link
Cohesion between 
water molecules, 
adhesion of 
water molecules 
to materials, and 
capillary action are 
covered fully in 
Chapter A1.1, see 
page 5.
Top tip!
The xylem vessels 
are rigid and do not 
change in volume: this 
means that as water 
molecules are lost the 
pressure is reduced. 
This causes the flow of 
water down a pressure 
gradient – from higher 
to lower pressure.
	
◆Tension: the force 
that is transmitted 
through a substance 
when it is pulled tight 
by forces acting from 
opposite ends.
	
◆Transpiration 
stream: the flow of 
water through a plant, 
from the roots to the 
leaves, via the xylem 
vessels.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
304
 
■What are the advantages of transpiration?
It is evident that transpiration is a direct result of plant structure, plant nutrition and the mechanism 
of gas exchange in leaves, rather than being a valuable process itself. In effect, the living plant is a 
‘wick’ that steadily dries the soil around it. However, transpiration confers advantages, too:
l	 Evaporation of water from the cells of the leaf in the light has a strong cooling effect (energy is 
needed to break hydrogen bonds between water molecules as water vapour forms, which cools 
the plant).
l	 The stream of water travelling up from the roots in the xylem passively carries the dissolved ions 
that have been absorbed from the soil solution in the root hairs. These are required in the leaves 
and growing points of the plant.
l	 All the cells of a plant receive water by lateral movements of water from xylem vessels, via pits in 
their walls. This allows living cells to be fully hydrated. It is the turgor pressure of these cells that 
provides support to the whole leaf, enabling the leaf blade to receive maximum exposure to light. 
In fact, the entire aerial system of non-woody plants is supported by this turgor pressure.
So, transpiration does have significant roles in the life of the plant. The loss of water from plants also 
plays a role in the water cycle, where water evaporating from leaves condenses to form clouds and 
then falls as rain – without plants this cycle would be disrupted.
 ATL B3.2D 
Long-distance transport has been demonstrated for many plant hormones, including auxins, 
abscisic acid, cytokinins and gibberellins. 
How are these hormones transported around the plant? What effects do they have on growth, 
development and response of plants to stimuli (changes in the environment)?
Link
Phytohormones as 
signalling chemicals 
controlling growth, 
development and 
response to stimuli 
in plants is covered 
in Chapter C3.1, 
page 512.
 
■Movement of water in the xylem
Transport of water through the plant occurs in the xylem tissue. As we have seen, the cohesive 
property of water and the structure of xylem vessels allow transport under tension.
Xylem begins as cells with cellulose walls and living contents, connected end to end. During 
development, the end walls are dissolved away so that mature xylem vessels become long, hollow 
tubes. The living contents of a developing xylem vessel are used up in the process of depositing 
cellulose thickening to the inside of the lateral walls of the vessel. This is hardened by the deposition 
of a chemical substance, lignin. Consequently, xylem is 
extremely tough tissue. Furthermore, it is strengthened 
internally, which means it can resist negative pressure (suction) 
without collapsing in on itself. 
Figure B3.2.10 is a scanning electron micrograph of spirally 
thickened xylem vessels. When you examine xylem vessels 
in longitudinal sections by light microscopy, you will see that 
some xylem vessels may have differently deposited thickening 
– many have rings of thickening, for example.
Top tip!
The walls of the xylem 
are strengthened by 
lignin, which enables 
the vessels to resist 
negative pressure 
caused by cohesion–
tension.
 
■Figure B3.2.10 Scanning electron 
micrograph of spiral xylem vessels
	
◆Lignin: complex 
polymer in which 
cellulose microfibrils are 
embedded, giving great 
strength and rigidity to 
xylem.
 
■Movement into and through the root
The uptake of water occurs in the root system but, as we 
have seen, the movement of water up the stem is driven by 
conditions in the leaves. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
305
The root system provides a huge surface area in contact with soil, because plants have a system of 
branching roots that continually grow at each root tip, pushing through the soil. This is important 
because it is the dilute solution that occurs around soil particles that the plant accesses to obtain the 
large volume of water and essential ions it requires. Contact with the soil is vastly increased by the 
region of root hairs that occurs just behind the growing tip of each root (Figure B3.2.11). Root hairs 
are extensions of individual epidermal cells and are relatively short-lived. As root growth continues, 
fresh resources of soil solution are exploited.
in older parts of the root the
walls of the outermost cells
become waxy (so preventing
water uptake in these regions)
individual mature root hair (enlarged)
soil particles
surface film of water around
soil particles and root cells
vacuole
nucleus
cytoplasm
root hair
soil air (essential
for healthy root
growth)
soil level
growth at tip of
lateral root occurs
in the same way as
at the tip of the
main (tap) root
lateral roots
main root of tap
root system
region of root hairs
region of elongation
(pushes root tip
through the soil)
region of growth
(cell division) at
root tip
xylem
phloem
endodermis:
a single layer
of cells
high power 
detail of stele
stele (central
vascular tissue)
mature root in
cross section
 
■Figure B3.2.11 The 
region of absorption 
in the root system
Uptake of water is largely by mass flow through the interconnecting ‘free spaces’ in the cellulose 
cell walls, but there are three possible routes of water movement through plant cells and tissues 
(Figure B3.2.12).
l	 Mass flow of water occurs through the interconnecting free spaces between the cellulose fibres of 
the plant cell walls. This free space in cellulose makes up about 50% of the wall volume. This 
route of water movement through the plant is a highly significant one. This pathway entirely 
avoids the living contents of cells and is called the apoplast pathway. The apoplast also 
includes the water-filled spaces of dead cells (and the hollow xylem vessels – as we shall 
shortly see).
	
◆Apoplast pathway: 
the pathway (e.g. of 
water) through the 
non-living part of a cell, 
e.g. cell walls and spaces 
between cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
306
l	 Diffusion occurs through the cytoplasm of cells and via the cytoplasmic connections between 
cells (called plasmodesmata). Osmosis occurs through the cell membrane. This route is called 
the symplast pathway. The plant cells are packed with many organelles, which resist the flow of 
water, slowing movement of water through this pathway relative to the apoplast pathway.
l	 Osmosis occurs from vacuole to vacuole of cells, driven by a gradient in osmotic pressure. This 
is the vacuolar pathway. Active uptake of mineral ions in the roots causes absorption of water 
by osmosis. This is not a significant pathway of water transport across the plant, but it is how 
individual cells absorb water.
While all three routes are open, the bulk of water crosses from the epidermis of the root tissue to the 
xylem via the apoplast (Figures B3.2.12 and B3.2.13).
plasma membrane
(selectively permeable)
nucleus
cellulose cell wall
vacuole
soil solution (very
dilute solution of
ions – low solute potential)
movement of water by osmosis
– from a region of low solute potential to a region of higher solute potential
apoplast pathway of water movement (= mass flow)
(through space in the wall cellulose
– about 50% of the wall volume)
root hair cell
in contact with
soil solution
symplast pathway of water movement
(through living cytoplasm, by diffusion,
including through the cytoplasmic connections
between cells)
vacuole
cells of root
cytoplasm
 
■Figure B3.2.12 How water moves across plant cells
A transverse section of a root (Figure B3.2.12 and Figure B3.2.13, page 307) shows that the centrally 
placed vascular tissue is contained by the endodermis. The endodermis is a layer of cells that is 
unique to the root. At the endodermis, a waxy strip in the radial walls blocks the passage of water by 
the apoplastic route (Figure B3.2.13). This waxy strip is called the Casparian strip. Water passes 
through the endodermis symplastically (via the symplast pathway) by osmosis. The significance of 
this diversion is that the cytoplasm of endodermal cells actively transports ions from the cortex to 
the endodermis. The result is a higher concentration of ions in the cells at the centre of the root. 
The raised osmotic potential there thus causes passive water uptake to follow, by osmosis. Once 
again, it is active uptake and transfer of ions within the root that causes water uptake by osmosis. 
Top tip!
All transport must pass through the symplast, which allows control over substances reaching the 
xylem. However, there are places where the endodermal restriction can be bypassed – this is known 
as ‘bypass flow’. Sites of bypass occur in the root tip where endodermis is not formed and where 
lateral roots emerge, although this differs between species.
	
◆Symplast pathway: 
the pathway (e.g. of 
water) through the 
cell membrane and 
plasmodesmata (the living 
contents of the cell).
3	 List the features 
of root hairs 
that facilitate 
absorption of 
water from 
the soil.
	
◆Vacuolar pathway: 
water movement through 
the plasma membrane, 
cytoplasm and then 
through the vacuole.
	
◆Endodermis: 
single layer of cells that 
surrounds the vascular 
tissue (xylem and phloem) 
in the root of a plant.
	
◆Casparian strip: a 
band of cells containing 
suberin, a waxy substance 
impermeable to water 
found in the endodermal 
cell walls of plant roots.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
307
whole
plant
spaces in
cellulose
cell walls
saturated
with water
endodermal cell –
water passes through
cytoplasm (apoplast 
pathway blocked, 
temporarily)
guard cell
beside open
stoma
water vapour
diffuses out of
open stoma
evaporation of
water into
leaf air spaces
movement of water via
apoplast (most water
travels this way)
Heat energy from the Sun
warms the leaves, causing
evaporation of water, and
is ultimately responsible
for drawing water up the
plant stem (the
transpiration stream).
xylem 
vessel
water 
uptake
by osmosis
water uptake
by osmosis
endodermis
root hair
water movement
in apoplast
apoplast pathway – water passes
by mass flow through free space
between cellulose fibres of wall
and hollow (dead) xylem vessels 
water is drawn up in the
transpiration stream
soil solution
Casparian strip
wax strip in
radial wall
Water uptake from soil solution, and its 
movement across root to xylem vessels.
Water loss from xylem to
air (as vapour) in the leaf.
waxy cuticle prevents
water loss through
epidermal cells
 
■Figure B3.2.13 Water uptake and loss by a green plant – a summary
4	 Explain the consequence of the Casparian strip for the apoplast pathway of 
water movement.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
308
 ATL B3.2E 
Scientists are often asked to present complex ideas succinctly and in an easily understandable 
way. The transport of water involves several different stages, all parts of the plant and many 
different processes. 
In groups, read the following article and summarize the key points in a poster to present to the 
rest of your class:
www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/water-uptake-and-transport-in-vascular-
plants-103016037
Did you learn anything extra about how water is transported in plants? Were you able to explain 
these ideas clearly in your poster?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Adaptations of xylem vessels  
for transport of water
The structure of xylem vessels is seen in transverse (TS) and longitudinal sections 
(LS) of plant stems. In prepared slides of sectioned and stained plant organs, the 
cell walls that have been strengthened with lignin stand out particularly clearly. 
Xylem have thickened walls that are strengthened with lignin. Lignin is 
waterproof, which stops water escaping from the vessels. Pits in the walls allow 
for entry of water and lateral movement between vessels. After xylem form, the 
cell contents (cytoplasm, nucleus and other organelles) are removed and the cells 
join to form dead, hollow tubes.
Concept: Function
The adaptations of xylem allow the following:
l	 unimpeded flow of water and minerals (lack of cell contents and 
incomplete or absent end walls)
l	 ability to withstand tension (lignified walls)
l	 areas for entry and exit of water (pits).
Distribution of tissues in a transverse section 
of the stem of a dicotyledonous plant
The internal structure of plants is seen by examination of transverse sections. A plan diagram 
(sometimes called a low-power diagram) is a drawing that records the relative positions of structures 
within an organ or organism, seen in section. It does not show individual cells.
From the plan diagram in Figure B3.2.15, we can see that the stem is surrounded or contained by 
a layer of cells called the epidermis. The stem contains vascular tissue (xylem for water transport 
and phloem for transport of organic solutes) in a discrete system of veins or vascular bundles. In the 
stem, the vascular bundles are arranged in a ring, positioned towards the outside of the stem (in a 
region that we call the cortex).
phloem
cambium
(cells
capable
of further
division)
fibres
protoxylem
vessels
metaxylem
vessels
epidermis
 
■Figure B3.2.14 Photomicrograph 
of vascular bundle of sunflower 
(Helianthus annuus) seen in TS (×150)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B3.2   Transport
309
young sunflower plant showing positions of
the sections shown to the right and in Figure B3.1.8
position of the leaf section
in Figure B3.1.8
leaf blade
stem with ring of
vascular bundles
soil level
root with central
vascular tissue
tap root
leaf stalk
stem
cortex
pith
epidermis
vascular
bundles
phloem
position of
cambium
xylem
plan diagram of stem in transverse section (TS)
 
■Figure B3.2.15 The distribution of tissues in the stem
photomicrograph of TS through part of the 
stem of a sunflower plant (Helianthus) (×10)
cortex
pith
epidermis
vascular bundle
leaf trace (i.e. small vascular 
bundle – branch serving a leaf)
 
■Drawing plan diagrams from micrographs
Plan diagrams can be drawn from micrographs to identify the relative positions of vascular bundles, 
xylem, phloem, cortex and epidermis in a stem. You should annotate the diagram with the main 
functions of these structures discussed in this chapter.
When drawing a plan diagram: show only outlines and not individual cells; use clear, continuous 
lines; use a sharp pencil; do not use shading; label every boundary. Draw the size of boundaries and 
regions in the proportions indicated in the original micrograph. Add a scale to your drawing: provide 
a bar of defined length, e.g. 100 μm, or give an estimated size of the object (see page 57).
Top tip!
A plan diagram can be drawn from the stem in the micrograph (just one half), respecting shapes, 
sizes and proportions as described in the text.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
310
Distribution of tissues in a transverse 
section of a dicotyledonous root
The xylem of root and stem are connected, but the arrangement of vascular tissues varies. In a 
root (see below) the xylem is centrally placed but, in the stem, xylem occurs in the ring of vascular 
bundles – Figure B3.2.15. The location of the phloem are also different in the root compared to the 
stem (Figures B3.2.15 and B3.2.16).
 
■Drawing plan diagrams from microscope images
Plan diagrams can be drawn from a root micrograph to identify the relative positions of vascular 
bundles, xylem and phloem, cortex and epidermis. High power, to see details of structures, is not 
needed to draw a plan diagram.
When drawing a plan diagram, make it large enough so that it fills the paper – when looking down 
a microscope it is easy to make the image too small. Keep the eye you are not using to look down 
the microscope open – this helps you to move your gaze away from the eyepiece and refocus on the 
drawing paper. If you make a mistake, use a good quality eraser to rub out the lines completely. 
Specimens should be studied carefully before any drawing is undertaken, noting particularly where 
the outlines of structures are going to be identified in the final drawing. Use high power if necessary: 
accurate details of structures can often only be revealed at high power.
root hair
cross section
epidermis
phloem
xylem
root hairs
endodermis
Casparian strip
cortex
 
■Figure B3.2.16 Transverse section of a root
Tissue fluid
 
■Release and reuptake of tissue fluid in capillaries
The blood circulation delivers essential resources (nutrients and oxygen, for example) to the tissues of 
the body. This occurs as the blood flows through the capillaries between the cells of the body (Figure 
B3.2.17). There are tiny gaps in the capillary walls, found to vary in size in different parts of the body. 
Through these gaps passes a watery liquid, very similar in composition to plasma. This is tissue fluid. 
Red blood cells, platelets and most blood proteins are not present in tissue fluid, however; these are 
retained in the capillaries. Tissue fluid surrounds (bathes) the living cells of the body. Nutrients are 
supplied from this fluid, and carbon dioxide and waste products of metabolism are carried away in it.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse the 
cells of the cortex with 
xylem and phloem 
tissue. The cortex is 
found around the 
outside of the root; 
the vascular tissues 
are in the central 
part. Xylem form a 
cross-shaped structure 
with phloem located 
between the arms of 
the cross. Xylem can 
be distinguished from 
phloem by their thicker 
cell walls.
	
◆Tissue fluid: a 
mixture of water and 
solutes, forced out of the 
blood by ultrafiltration, 
which surrounds body 
cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
311
Given the quantity of dissolved solutes in the plasma (including all the blood plasma proteins), we 
would expect the water potential of the blood to limit the loss of water by osmosis. In fact, we might 
expect water to be passing back into the capillaries from the tissue fluid due to osmosis. However, 
the force applied to the blood by the heart creates enough hydrostatic pressure to overcome 
osmotic water uptake, at least at the arteriole end of the capillary bed. Here the blood pressure is 
significantly higher than at the venule ends. Then, as the blood flows through the capillary bed, 
there is progressive loss of water and hydrostatic pressure. As a result, much of the tissue fluid can 
eventually return to the plasma – about 90% returns by this route (Figure B3.2.18).
arteriole end
venule end
ultrafiltration
of water and small
molecules (oxygen,
glucose, amino
acids) due to
hydrostatic pressure
diffusion gradient
(oxygen and nutrients
required by respiring
cells)
osmotic
movement
of water
osmotic
movement
of water
diffusion gradient
(waste metabolites)
hydrostatic
pressure
reduced
net outflow
net inflow
Blood proteins, particularly the albumins, cannot escape; they maintain the water potential of
the plasma, preventing excess loss of water and assisting the return of fluid to the capillaries.
blood in
capillary
tissue fluid
Link
Water potential 
is covered fully in 
Chapter D2.3,  
page 690.
	
◆Hydrostatic 
pressure: mechanical 
pressure exerted on or 
by liquid (e.g. water), 
also known as pressure 
potential.
 
■Figure B3.2.18 Forces 
for exchange in capillaries
blood flow
from the
heart
artery
arteriole
capillary
network
bypass vessel
semilunar valve
lymph
capillary
tissue fluid forced into
lymph capillaries and
(blood) capillaries by
movements of
surrounding tissues
and by pressure
blood flow
back to the
heart
vein
venule
semilunar valve
cells
bathed
in tissue
fluid
cells give out waste
products (e.g. carbon
dioxide, unwanted
metabolites, excess ions)
cells take in nutrients
(e.g. oxygen, glucose,
amino acids, fatty acids,
vitamins, ions)
tissue fluid formed
from blood plasma
pre-capillary sphincter
(when this contracts
most of the blood is
sent along the bypass
vessel)
substances leave (and enter)
capillaries through the walls
basement
membrane
capillary wall (enlarged)
endothelial cells
The role of the bypass vessel
Which tissues of the body are being served by the blood circulation is regulated. When tiny pre-capillary sphincter muscles are 
contracted, blood flow to that capillary bed is restricted to a minimum. Most blood is then diverted through bypass vessels – it is 
shunted to other tissues and organs in the body. 
 
■Figure B3.2.17 Exchange between blood and cells via tissue fluid


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
312
This means that further along the capillary bed there is a net inflow of tissue fluid to the capillary. 
However, not all tissue fluid is returned to the blood circulation by this route – some enters the 
lymph capillaries (see below and Figure B3.2.17). 
Exchange of substances between 
tissue fluid and cells in tissues
Blood plasma is a straw-coloured liquid that forms around 55% of the blood. Plasma is largely 
composed of water (95%). Water is a good solvent, and so many substances dissolve in it, allowing 
them to be transported around the body in the plasma (Chapter A1.1, page 8). Both plasma and 
tissue fluid contain water and dissolved solutes (such as salts).
There are many differences between the composition of plasma and tissue fluid. Tissue fluid 
contains far fewer proteins, for example. Many plasma proteins are too large to fit through gaps in the 
capillary walls and so remain in the blood.
Table B3.2.1 shows a comparison of the composition of blood plasma and tissue fluid.
 
■Table B3.2.1 Comparing blood plasma and tissue fluid
Content
Blood plasma
Tissue fluid
Cells
red blood cells (erythrocytes), white 
blood cells (phagocytes and lymphocytes) 
and platelets
phagocytes
Proteins
more proteins, including large plasma 
proteins and hormones
fewer proteins (smaller)
Glucose
80–120 mg per 100 ml
less (absorbed by cells for respiration)
Fats
lipoproteins (for fat transport in plasma)
none
Amino acids
more
fewer (absorbed by cells)
Oxygen
more
less (absorbed by cells for respiration)
Carbon dioxide
less
more (released by cells as a product 
of respiration)
Drainage of excess tissue fluid into lymph ducts
Molecules too large to enter capillaries are removed from the tissues via the lymphatic system 
(Figure B3.2.19). There are tiny valves in the walls of the lymph capillaries that permit this. The 
network of lymph capillaries drains into larger lymph ducts (known as lymphatics). Then, lymph is 
moved along the lymphatics by contractions of smooth muscles in their walls and by compression 
from body movements. Backflow is prevented by valves, as it is in the veins.
Lymph finally drains back into the blood circulation in veins close to the heart. At intervals along the 
way there are lymph nodes present in the lymphatics. Lymph passes through these nodes before it 
is returned to the blood circulation. In the nodes, phagocytic macrophages engulf bacteria and any 
cell detritus present. The nodes are also a site where certain cells of the immune system are found 
(see Chapter C3.2, page 523).
Top tip!
Tissue fluid is formed 
by pressure filtration 
(ultrafiltration) of 
plasma in capillaries. 
This is promoted by 
the higher pressure of 
blood from arterioles. 
Lower pressure in the 
venules allows tissue 
fluid to drain back 
into capillaries.
	
◆Lymphatic system: 
network of fine capillaries 
throughout the body of 
vertebrates, which drain 
lymph and return it to the 
blood circulation.
	
◆Lymph: fluid that 
flows through the 
lymphatic system.
	
◆Lymph node: a 
kidney-shaped organ in 
the lymphatic system, 
part of the body’s 
defences against disease.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
313
body tissues –
here metabolites are
delivered, respiratory gases
are exchanged and
waste products are
removed by the tissue fluid
lymph drains into the blood circulation via
ducts that join the veins in the neck
this duct drains
the right side of
the head and thorax,
and the right arm
this duct drains
the remainder
of the body
veins
returning
blood to
the heart
groups of
lymph nodes
lymph
nodes
lymph ducts
(lymphatics) –
lymph
capillaries
drain into
these
a lymph node in section
fixed macrophages
engulf bacteria, debris
and toxins by phagocytosis
certain cells of the immune system
(lymphocytes and plasma cells)
are made here
the flow of lymph is propelled by
contraction of smooth muscle
fibres in the walls of the lymphatics
and by the movement and
pressures of the surrounding tissues;
backflow is prevented by valves
the lymphatic circulation
lymph
nodes
lymph
capillary
10% of
tissue fluid
becomes
lymph
90% of tissue
fluid is returned
to the capillaries 
vein
artery
blood
capillaries
heart
lymphatic
 
■Figure B3.2.19 The layout and role of the lymphatic system
Differences between the single circulation of 
bony fish and the double circulation of mammals
 ATL B3.2F 
The following diagram shows the circulatory systems of three different animals:
gill capillaries
artery
heart:
ventricle (V)
atrium (A)
vein
systemic capillaries
systemic capillaries
systemic circuit
right
left
V
A
A
lung and skin capillaries
systemic capillaries
lung capillaries
pulmonary circuit
systemic circuit
right
left
V
A
A
V
a
b
c
    
 
■Figure B3.2.20 The circulatory systems of a) fish, b) amphibians and c) mammals
a	 Describe differences 
between the three 
different circulatory 
systems.
b	 Suggest what is 
meant by ‘systemic’ 
capillaries.
c	
Suggest the 
advantages of 
having a mammalian 
heart compared to 
an amphibian or a 
fish heart.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
314
Mammals and fish have a closed circulation in which blood is pumped by a powerful, muscular heart 
and circulated in a continuous system of tubes – the arteries, veins and capillaries – under pressure. 
Bony fish have a single circulation (Figure B3.2.21). This means that blood enters and leaves the 
heart once in each complete circuit. Blood enters from the body and then leaves to go to the gills, 
where blood is oxygenated, and then it is moved to the rest of the body where oxygen is delivered 
to tissues.
blood pumped
to the gills first
two-chambered heart
then on to the
rest of the body
double circulation of mammals
blood passes twice through the
heart in each complete circulation
pulmonary circulation
(to lungs)
four-chambered
heart
systemic circulation
(to body tissues)
single circulation of fish
blood passes once through
the heart in each complete
circulation
closed circulation systems
 
■Figure B3.2.21 Closed circulatory systems of bony fish and mammals
Mammals, however, have a double circulation (Figures B3.2.21 and B3.2.22). The heart has four 
chambers and is divided into right and left sides. Blood flows from the right side of the heart to 
the lungs, then back to the left side of the heart. The role of the right side of the heart is to pump 
deoxygenated blood to the lungs, where it is oxygenated. The left side of the heart pumps the 
oxygenated blood around the rest of the body and back to the right side of the heart. The arteries, 
veins and capillaries serving the lungs are known as the pulmonary circulation.
The major advantages of the mammalian circulation are:
l	 simultaneous high-pressure delivery of oxygenated blood to all regions of the body
l	 oxygenated and deoxygenated blood do not mix, ensuring that oxygenated blood reaches the 
respiring tissues undiluted by deoxygenated blood.
The left side of the heart pumps oxygenated blood to the rest of the body. The arteries, veins and 
capillaries serving the body are known as the systemic circulation. 
In the systemic circulation, organs are supplied with blood by many arteries. These all branch from the 
aorta, the main artery that takes blood away from the heart. Within each organ the artery divides into 
numerous arterioles (smaller arteries), and the smallest arterioles supply the capillary networks. 
Capillaries drain into venules (smaller veins) and venules join to form veins. The veins join the vena 
cava carrying blood back to the heart. The branching sequence in the circulation is, therefore: 
aorta → artery → arteriole → capillary → venule → vein → vena cava 
You can see that the arteries and veins are often named after the organs they serve (Figure B3.2.22). 
For example, the blood supply to the liver is via the hepatic artery. Notice, too, the liver also receives 
blood directly from the small intestine via a vein called the hepatic portal vein. This brings many of 
the products of digestion, after they have been absorbed into the capillaries of the villi.  
	
◆Closed circulation: 
blood is contained inside 
blood vessels, circulating 
in one direction from 
the heart through the 
circulatory system before 
returning to the heart 
again.
	
◆Single circulation: 
blood passes through 
the heart once in each 
complete circuit of the 
body; blood is pumped by 
the heart to the gills, after 
which the blood flows to 
the rest of the body and 
back to the heart.
	
◆Double circulation: 
in which the blood passes 
twice through the heart 
(pulmonary circulation, 
then systemic circulation) 
in any one complete 
circuit of the body.
	
◆Pulmonary 
circulation: the blood 
circulation to the lungs 
in vertebrates having a 
double circulation.
	
◆Systemic circulation: 
the blood circulation 
to the body (not the 
pulmonary circulation).
Top tip!
In mammals, as the 
blood passes twice 
through the heart in 
every single circulation 
of the body, the system 
is called a double 
circulation.
5	 List the differences 
between the 
pulmonary 
circulation and the 
systemic circulation 
of blood.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
315
lungs
left
atrium
left
ventricle
lower limbs
the circulatory system as shown here is simplified, e.g. limbs, 
lungs, kidneys and gonads are paired structures in the body
gonads (ovaries, testes)
head
kidneys
stomach/intestines
hepatic portal vein
liver
heart
upper limbs
pulmonary artery
pulmonary vein
jugular vein
carotid artery
pulmonary
circulation
aorta
vena cava
hepatic artery
hepatic vein
renal artery
renal vein
systemic
circulation
right
atrium
right
ventricle
The position of the major vessels
The layout of the blood circulation
Adaptations of the mammalian heart 
for delivering blood to the arteries
 
■The heart as a pump
An adult human’s heart is about the size of a clenched fist. It lies in the thorax between the lungs 
and beneath the breastbone (sternum). The heart is a hollow organ with a muscular wall that is 
contained in a tightly fitting membrane called the pericardium – a strong, non-elastic sac that 
anchors the heart within the thorax. Most importantly, the wall of the heart is well supplied with 
oxygenated blood from the aorta, via coronary arteries.
All muscle tissue consists of special cells called fibres that can shorten by a half to a third of their 
length. Cardiac muscle itself consists of cylindrical branching columns of fibres, forming a unique 
three-dimensional network. This allows contraction in three dimensions. Each fibre has a single nucleus 
and it appears striped, or striated, under the microscope. Fibres are surrounded by a special plasma 
membrane called the sarcolemma, and all are very well supplied by mitochondria and capillaries.  
 
■The chambers of the heart
The cavity of the heart is divided into four chambers, with the chambers on the right side of the heart 
completely separate from those on the left. The two upper chambers are thin-walled atria (singular, 
atrium). These receive blood into the heart. The two lower chambers are thick-walled ventricles, with 
the muscular wall of the left ventricle much thicker than that of the right ventricle. However, the 
volumes of the right and left sides (the quantities of blood they contain) are identical. The ventricles 
pump blood out of the heart.
	
◆Pericardium: a tough 
membrane surrounding 
and containing the heart.
	
◆Atrium (plural, 
atria): upper chamber 
of the heart from which 
blood is passed to the 
ventricles. 
	
◆Ventricle: lower 
chamber of the heart 
which receives blood from 
a corresponding atrium 
and from which blood 
moves into the arteries.
Link
Cardiac muscle is 
covered in Chapters 
B2.3, page 268, and 
B3.3, page 327.
Top tip!
Blood flows from the 
intestine to the liver 
through the hepatic 
portal vein. ‘Hepatic’ 
means of or relating to 
the liver, and ‘portal’ 
refers to blood moving 
from the capillary bed 
of one structure (in 
this case, the small 
intestine) to supply 
the capillary bed of 
another structure 
(the liver).
 
■Figure B3.2.22 
The human blood 
circulation


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
316
The heartbeat originates in a tiny part of the muscle of the wall of the right atrium, called the 
pacemaker. From here, a wave of excitation (electrical impulses) spreads out across both atria. In 
response, the muscle of both atrial walls contracts simultaneously. Subsequently, the electrical impulse 
passes to the base of the ventricles, from which it spreads upwards causing the ventricles to contract.
TOK
Our current understanding is that emotions are the product of activity in the brain, rather than in the 
heart. Is knowledge based on science more valid than knowledge based on intuition?
Top tip!
Make sure you can identify the features of the mammalian heart on a diagram of the heart shown 
from the front, including cardiac muscle, pacemaker, atria, ventricles, atrioventricular and semilunar 
valves, septum and coronary vessels. Practise tracing the unidirectional flow of blood from named 
veins to arteries.
6	 The edges of the atrioventricular valves have non-elastic strands attached (the chordae 
tendineae (tendinous cords) or ‘heart strings’), which are anchored to the ventricle walls 
(Figure B3.2.23). Explain exactly what the strands do.
vena cava
from head
right
pulmonary
artery
right
pulmonary
veins
vena cava
from lower
part of body
left pulmonary
artery
left pulmonary
veins
coronary artery
aorta
coronary vein
heart viewed from the front of the body with pericardium removed
 
■Figure B3.2.23 The structure of the heart
vena cava
from head
pacemaker
(sinoatrial node)
vena cava
from lower
part of body
aorta
right atrium
tricuspid valve
heart in LS
right
ventricle
left pulmonary
veins
left pulmonary
artery
left atrium
semilunar
valves
bicuspid
valve
left ventricle
tendinous chords
right
pulmonary
artery
cardiac muscle
septum
 
■The valves in the heart
The valves of the heart prevent backflow of the blood, maintaining the direction of blood flow 
through the heart. You can see these valves in action in the diagrams in Figure B3.2.24. Notice that 
the atrioventricular valves are large valves, in a position to prevent backflow of blood from 
ventricles back up into the atria. The edges of these valves are supported by tendons, anchored to the 
muscle walls of the ventricles below. These tendons prevent the valves from folding back due to the 
huge pressure that develops with each heartbeat. The atrioventricular valves are individually named: 
on the right side is the tricuspid valve; on the left is the bicuspid valve. 
Concept: Form
The structure of 
the heart includes 
cardiac muscle, 
a pacemaker, 
atria, ventricles, 
atrioventricular and 
semilunar valves, 
the septum and 
coronary vessels.
	
◆Atrioventricular 
valve: heart valve that 
opens to allow the 
passage of blood into 
a ventricle; it closes to 
prevent backflow of 
blood into the atrium.
	
◆Tricuspid valve: 
atrioventricular valve on 
the right side of the heart.
	
◆Bicuspid valve: 
atrioventricular valve on 
the left side of the heart.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
317
A different type of valve separates the ventricles from the pulmonary artery (right side) and aorta (left 
side). These are pocket-like structures called semilunar valves, rather like the valves seen in veins. 
These stop backflow from the aorta and pulmonary artery into the ventricles as the ventricles relax 
between heartbeats. 
In Figure B3.2.23, we can see the coronary arteries. These arteries, and the capillaries they serve, 
deliver oxygen and nutrients essential for the pumping action to the muscle fibres of the heart and 
they remove the waste products. 
Diastole – atrial and ventricular
• The muscles of the atrial and ventricular walls are
   relaxed – the pressure in both atria and ventricles is low
• The semilunar valves shut – there is a passive flow of
   blood from the veins into the atria and ventricles
Heart valves allow blood flow in
one direction only. They are
opened and closed by
differences in blood pressure.
• They are opened when the
   pressure on the input side
   (caused by muscle contraction)
   exceeds that on the output side.
• They are closed when the
   pressure on the output side
   exceeds that on the input side,
   typically caused by the
   relaxation of muscle on the
   input side. 
Atrial systole
• Atrial walls contract – the pressure is raised in the atria
• Venae cavae and pulmonary veins are closed
• Atrioventricular valves pushed open – blood flows into the ventricles
• Ventricular walls are relaxed – the pressure is low in the ventricles
• High pressure in the aorta and pulmonary arteries (due to the elastic
   and muscle fibres in their walls) – the semilunar valves are shut
Ventricular systole
• Ventricular walls contract strongly – the pressure is raised in the ventricles
• Atrioventricular valves are closed and semilunar valves are opened –
   blood is pushed out into the aorta and the arteries are stretched
• Atrial walls relax – the pressure falls in the atria
• The venae cavae and pulmonary veins are open – blood flows into the atria
 
■Figure B3.2.24 The role of the heart valves
Concept: Function
The structures of the mammalian heart enable:
l	 the separation of oxygenated and deoxygenated 
blood (septum separating left and right atria, left 
and right ventricles)
l	 continuing contraction of muscle throughout life, 
with muscle contracting in multiple directions 
(cardiac muscle)
l	 the flow of blood in one direction, from atria to 
ventricles and then from ventricles to arteries leaving 
the heart (atrioventricular valves and semilunar valves)
l	 supply of blood to the heart to ensure sufficient 
supply of nutrients and oxygen (coronary arteries)
l	 control of heart contraction (pacemaker) : cardiac 
muscle is myogenic, which means that it is self-
excitable and does not require electrical impulses 
from the central nervous system.
	
◆Semilunar valve: 
half-moon shaped valve, 
preventing backflow in a 
tube (e.g. a vein)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
318
Stages in the cardiac cycle
The cardiac cycle is the sequence of events of a heartbeat, by which blood is pumped all over the 
body. The heart beats at an approximate rate of about 60–100 times per minute, so each cardiac 
cycle is about 0.8 seconds long. This period of ‘heartbeat’ is divided into two stages, which are called 
systole and diastole. In the systole stage, heart muscle contracts; during the diastole stage, heart 
muscle relaxes. When the muscular walls of the chambers of the heart contract, the volume of the 
chambers is decreased. This increases the pressure on the blood contained there, forcing the blood 
to a region where pressure is lower. Valves prevent blood from flowing backwards to a region of low 
pressure, so blood always flows in one direction through the heart.
Look at the steps in Figure B3.2.24 and B3.2.25. You will see that Figure B3.2.25 illustrates the cycle on 
the left side of the heart only, but both sides function together, in the same way, as Figure B3.2.24 
makes clear. Here is the sequence of events in the left side of the heart that follow the initiation of the 
heartbeat by the sinoatrial node (pacemaker). 
stage
atria
ventricles
1
2
3
ventricular systole
atrial diastole
atrial and
ventricular diastole
‘lub’
(heart sound when
the atrioventricular
valves close)
atrial systole
‘dup’
(heart sound when the
semilunar valves close)
semilunar valve
closes
bicuspid valve
opens
bicuspid
valve
closes
semilunar
valve opens
aorta
left ventricle
left atrium
pressure changes
in aorta, left
ventricle and left
atrium
0.7
0.5
time/s
0.6
0.1
0.4
0.2
0.8
0
pressure/kPa
0.3
14
10
6
0
–2
2
8
12
4
1 atrium muscles
contract, pushing
blood past the
atrioventricular valve
into the ventricle
3 blood flows 
   into the atrium
   and opens the
   atrioventricular
   valve as it starts
   to flow into the
   ventricle
ventricle and
atrium muscles 
relax, while the
pressure of blood
in the aorta causes
the semilunar valves
to shut
2 ventricle muscles contract
   and atrium muscles
   relax, causing blood pressure
   to close the atrioventricular
   valve and open the semilunar
   valves, forcing blood into
   the aorta
 
■Figure B3.2.25 The cardiac cycle
	
◆Cardiac cycle: the 
sequence of events of 
a heartbeat, by which 
blood is pumped all over 
the body.
	
◆Systole: contraction of 
heart muscle.
	
◆Diastole: relaxation of 
heart muscle.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
319
We start with contraction of the atrium (atrial systole, about 0.1 s). As the walls of the atrium 
contract, blood pushes past the atrioventricular valve into the ventricles, where the contents are 
under low pressure. At this time, any backflow of blood from the aorta (back into the ventricle 
chamber) is prevented by the semilunar valves. Notice that backflow from the atria into the vena 
cava and the pulmonary veins is prevented because contraction of the atrial walls seals off these 
veins. Veins also contain semilunar valves, which prevent backflow here too. 
Next, the ventricle contracts (ventricular systole, about 0.5 s). The high pressure this contraction 
generates slams shut the atrioventricular valve and opens the semilunar valves, forcing blood into 
the aorta. A ‘pulse’, detectable in arteries all over the body, is generated (see below). Following 
contraction of the ventricle muscles, the atrium relaxes (atrial diastole, about 0.7 s).
This is followed by relaxation of the ventricles (ventricular diastole).
Each contraction of cardiac muscle is followed by relaxation. The changing pressure of blood in the 
atria, ventricles, pulmonary artery and aorta (shown in the graph in Figure B3.2.25) automatically 
opens and closes the valves.
7	 Examine the data on pressure 
change during the cardiac cycle 
in the graph in Figure B3.2.25. 
Deduce why:
a	 pressure in the aorta is always 
significantly higher than that 
in the atria
b	 pressure falls most abruptly 
in the atrium once ventricular 
systole is underway
c	 the semilunar valve in 
the aorta does not open 
immediately that ventricular 
systole commences
d	 when ventricular diastole 
commences, there is a 
significant delay before the 
bicuspid valve opens, despite 
rising pressure in the atrium
e	 it is significant that about 
50% of the cardiac cycle 
consists of diastole.
8	 Examine the graph shown in Figure B3.2.26, then answer the 
questions below.
a	 Comment on the velocity and pressure of the blood as it enters the 
aorta, compared with when it is about to re-enter the heart.
b	 Deduce what aspects of the structure of the walls of arteries may be 
said to be a response to the condition of blood flow through them.
c	 Explain what factors may cause the characteristic velocity of blood flow 
in the capillaries and why is this advantageous.
arteries
arterioles
capillaries
venules
veins
velocity of blood
blood pressure
total cross-
sectional area
of vessels
systole
systole
diastole
diastole
 
■Figure B3.2.26 Changing blood velocity, blood pressure and cross-
sectional area of vessels as blood circulates in the body
Top tip!
Make sure you can 
interpret systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure 
measurements from 
data and graphs. Use 
question 8 to help 
practice.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
320
 
■Origin and control of the heartbeat
The heart beats rhythmically throughout life, without rest, apart from the momentary relaxation that 
occurs between each beat. While heartbeats occur naturally, without the cardiac muscle needing to be 
stimulated by an external nerve, the alternating contractions of cardiac muscle of the atria and ventricles 
are controlled and coordinated precisely. Only in this way can the heart act as an efficient pump. 
The positions of the structures within the heart that bring this about are shown in Figure B3.2.27.
right and left bundle
branches
arch of aorta
sinoatrial node
atrioventricular
node
atrioventricular
bundle (bundle of His)
left atrium
left ventricle
right atrium
right ventricle
Purkinje fibres
The steps to control of the cardiac cycle are as follows: 
l	 The heartbeat originates in a tiny part of the muscle of the wall of the right atrium, called the 
sinoatrial node (SA node) or pacemaker.
l	 From here, a wave of excitation (electrical impulses) spreads out across both atria.
l	 In response, the muscle of both atrial walls contracts simultaneously (atrial systole).
l	 This stimulus does not spread to the ventricles immediately, due to the presence of a narrow band 
of non-conducting fibres at the base of the atria. These block the excitation wave, preventing its 
conduction across to the ventricles. Instead, the stimulus is picked up by the atrioventricular 
node (AV node), situated at the base of the right atrium.
l	 After a delay of 0.1–0.2 s, the excitation is passed from the AV node via the bundles of His (heart 
muscle that takes part in electrical conduction in the heart) to the base of both ventricles by tiny 
bundles of conducting fibres, known as Purkinje tissue.
l	 When stimulated, the ventricle muscles start to contract from the base of the heart upwards 
(ventricular systole).
l	 The delay that occurs, before the AV node acts as a ‘relay station’ for the impulse, permits the 
emptying of the atria into the ventricles to completely finish, and prevents the atria and ventricles 
from contracting simultaneously.
l	 After every contraction, cardiac muscle has a period of insensitivity to stimulation, the refractory 
period (a period of enforced non-contraction – diastole). In this phase, the heart begins, 
passively, to refill with blood. This period is a relatively long one in heart muscle, and enables the 
heart to beat throughout life.
 
■Figure B3.2.27 Control of heart rate
	
◆Sinoatrial node 
(pacemaker): structure 
found on right atrium of 
heart that is the origin of 
the myogenic heartbeat.
	
◆Atrioventricular 
node: mass of specialized 
cardiac muscle cells in the 
wall of the right atrium.
Top tip!
Although cardiac 
muscle fibres form 
an interconnected 
network, the network 
system of the atrial 
walls is entirely separate 
from that of the 
ventricles. The signals 
from the sinoatrial node 
cannot pass directly 
to the ventricles. This 
ensures a transmission 
delay between atria 
and ventricles.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
321
The heart’s own rhythm, set by the SA node, is about 60–100 beats per minute. Conditions in the 
body can and do override this basic rate to increase heart performance. The action of the pacemaker 
is modified according to the needs of the body. For example, pacemaker activity may be increased 
during physical activity. This occurs because increased muscle contraction causes an increased 
volume of blood to pass back to the heart. The response may be more powerful contractions without 
an increase in heart rate. Alternatively, the rate of 50–60 beats per minute of the heart ‘at rest’ may 
be increased to up to 200 beats a minute in very strenuous exercise.
There is a delay between the arrival and passing on of a stimulus at the AV node. This delay is the 
product of:
l	 the cells of the AV node taking longer to become excited than those of the SA node
l	 the smaller diameter of the AV cells, compared with those of the SA node, slowing conduction
l	 fewer sodium ion channels in the membranes of AV cells, and a more negative resting potential 
(page 469) than in the cells of the SA node
l	 fewer gap junctions in the intercalated discs of the cells of the AV node compared to the SA node.
The result of this delay in transmission (of about 100 ms) gives time for the atria to contract fully, 
adding to the volume of blood delivered to the ventricles. The delay also prevents the atria and 
ventricles from contracting simultaneously. The cardiac cycle relies on the atria contracting, pushing 
blood down into the ventricles, before the ventricles then contract to force blood out through the 
aorta or pulmonary artery. If the atria and ventricles contracted together, the chambers would not fill 
properly, leading to reduced cardiac output and low blood pressure.
TOK
The original discovery of the circulation of mammalian blood was made in Europe by experimental 
scientists William Harvey and Marcello Malpighi in the seventeenth century. Before this, much 
so-called medical knowledge was derived from the theories expressed in the writings of 
Galen, a Roman physician (ad129–199), and on the ideas of earlier Greek writers. In what ways 
have influential individuals contributed to the development of the natural sciences as an area 
of knowledge?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Generation of root pressure in xylem vessels
Endodermal cells of the root contain a waterproof substance (suberin) that blocks the apoplast 
pathway, directing water through the symplast pathway. This ensures water flows into the xylem and 
not out, enabling the plant to control water movement (Figure B3.2.28). In addition to the Casparian 
strip, endodermal cells pump salts into the xylem. This lowers the water potential of the xylem 
(i.e. increases solute concentration), enabling water to move down a water potential gradient 
(Figure B3.2.29). This creates a positive pressure potential, moving water and dissolved minerals a 
short distance up the xylem. This is called root pressure. 
When high humidity prevents transpiration, or in spring before the leaves on deciduous plants have 
opened, root pressure is generated to cause water movement in roots and stems when transport in 
the xylem due to transpiration is insufficient.
	
◆Root pressure: force 
generated in the roots 
that helps to drive water 
upwards into xylem vessels.
Link
Water potential is 
covered in detail 
in Chapter D2.3, 
page 690.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
322
salts
water pushed up
xylem by root pressure
xylem vessel
mineral salts actively
pumped in by
endodermis
water diverted
into cell
apoplast pathway
blocked by Casparian strip
endodermis
root hair cell
cell wall
water enters apoplast
pathway (through cell wall)
apoplast pathway (through cell wall)
symplast and vacuolar pathway
(through cytoplasm and vacuoles)
symplast pathway
(through cytoplasm)
and vacuolar pathway
(through vacuoles)
plasmodesmata
allow communication
between cells
water enters
by osmosis
high water
potential in cell
low water potential
Key
cortex
area shown in
main diagram
root cortex of
parenchyma cells
phloem
xylem
root hair cell
endodermis
 
■Figure B3.2.28 Passage of water through the root
apoplast pathway
(through cell wall)
symplast and
vacuolar pathway
cortex
Casparian strip
(apoplast block) forces water
into cytoplasm from cell wall route
water diverted
into cell
endodermis
water pushed up
xylem by root pressure
xylem vessel
salts actively pumped into
xylem by endodermis;
this lowers water potential
and draws in water by osmosis
salts
low water
potential
salts
pumped in
water by
osmosis
apoplast pathway (through cell wall)
symplast and vacuolar pathway
(through cytoplasm and vacuoles)
Key
 
■Figure B3.2.29 Development of root pressure
Common 
mistake
Diffusion is not the 
main method of 
mineral absorption 
– active transport 
is the means by 
which minerals are 
absorbed into plant 
roots. If plants are 
able to absorb water 
by osmosis, they 
must have higher 
solute concentrations 
inside their cells than 
outside, and this can 
only be achieved by 
active transport.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
323
Adaptations of phloem sieve tubes and 
companion cells for translocation of sap
Phloem tissue consists of sieve tubes and companion cells, and is served by transfer 
cells (Figure B3.2.30, and see also Chapter A2.2, page 79) in the leaves. Sieve tubes are 
narrow, elongated elements, connected end to end to form tubes. The end walls, known 
as sieve plates, are perforated by pores. The cytoplasm of a mature sieve tube has no 
nucleus, nor many of the other organelles of a cell. However, each sieve tube is connected 
to a companion cell by strands of cytoplasm, called plasmodesmata, which pass through 
narrow gaps (called pits) in the walls. The companion cells are believed to service and 
maintain the cytoplasm of the sieve tube, which has lost its nucleus.
phloem tissue in TS (low power)
sieve tube elements, 
each with a 
companion cell
sieve plate
companion cell
cytoplasm
contains a nucleus,
mitochondria,
endoplasmic reticulum,
Golgi apparatus
plasmodesmata – 
cytoplasmic
connections with
sieve tube
cell cytoplasm
sieve tube element with
end walls perforated as
a sieve plate
lining layer of cytoplasm
with small mitochondria
and some endoplasmic
reticulum, but without 
nucleus, ribosomes or
Golgi apparatus
companion cell and sieve tube
element in LS (high power)
sieve plate in surface view
 
■Figure B3.2.30 The structure of phloem tissue
electron micrograph in LS
companion cell
sieve plate
Top tip!
The cell walls of the sieve tubes are rigid, which enables the hydrostatic pressure needed to achieve 
mass flow.
Concept: Form
Phloem tissue show the 
following adaptations: sieve 
plates, reduced cytoplasm 
and organelles, no nucleus 
for sieve tube elements 
and presence of many 
mitochondria for companion 
cells; plasmodesmata 
between companion cells and 
sieve tube elements.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
324
Phloem is a living tissue and has a relatively high rate of aerobic respiration during transport. In fact, 
transport of manufactured sucrose and amino acids in the phloem is an active process, using energy 
from metabolism.
 
■The process of translocation
Translocation can be illustrated by examining the movement of sugar from the leaves. The story 
starts at the point where sugars are made and accumulate within the mesophyll in the leaf. This is 
the source area. 
Sucrose is loaded into the companion cell, and from there into the phloem sieve tube elements in 
the leaf by active transport. The accumulation of sugar in the sieve tube elements raises the solute 
potential and water follows the sucrose by osmosis. This creates a high hydrostatic pressure in the 
sieve tubes of the source area.
Meanwhile, in living cells elsewhere in the plant – often, but not necessarily, in the roots – sucrose 
may be converted into insoluble starch deposits. This is a sink area. As sucrose flows out of the sieve 
tubes here, the solute potential is lowered. Water then diffuses out and the hydrostatic pressure 
is lowered. 
Sources and sinks can vary according to the time of year. For example, in annual plants storage 
organs can be sinks or sources at different times of the year. Following periods of dormancy, such as 
winter, roots become sources when stores of starch are mobilized and converted into sucrose to be 
transported to growing regions of the plant, such as the leaves (which are the sinks).
These processes create the difference in hydrostatic pressures in source and sink areas that drive 
mass flow in the phloem.
9	 Deduce what the presence of many mitochondria in the companion cells implies about 
the role of these cells in the movement of ‘sap’ in the phloem.
The pressure–flow hypothesis
The principle of the pressure–flow hypothesis is that the sugar solution flows down a hydrostatic 
pressure gradient. There is a high hydrostatic pressure in sieve elements near mesophyll cells in the 
light (source area), but low hydrostatic pressure in elements near starch storage cells of the stem 
and root (sink area). This mass flow is illustrated in Figure B3.2.31, and the annotations explain 
the steps. 
In this hypothesis, the role of the companion cells (living cells, with a full range of organelles in the 
cytoplasm) is to maintain conditions in the sieve tube elements favourable to mass flow of solutes. 
Companion cells use metabolic energy (ATP) to do this.
	
◆Translocation: 
the movement of 
manufactured food 
(e.g. sucrose and amino 
acids) which occurs in 
the phloem tissue of the 
vascular bundles.
	
◆Source: location in 
a plant where glucose 
is produced or stored 
(cotyledons, potato 
tubers, carrots) and 
converted into sucrose for 
transport.
	
◆Sink: location in a 
plant where sucrose is 
transported to, either to 
be converted to glucose 
for storage as starch or 
for use in respiration.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.2   Transport
325
model demonstrating pressure flow
(A = mesophyll cell, B = starch storage cell)
concentrated sugar solution 
(low solute potential) in
partially permeable
reservoir (non-elastic)
water
net water entry 
by osmosis
flow of water 
(= xylem) 
flow of solution 
(= phloem)
water or very dilute 
solution of ions (high 
solute potential) in 
partially permeable 
reservoir (non-elastic) 
water
water flow by 
hydrostatic pressure
In this model, the pressure flow of
solution would continue until the
concentration in A and B is
the same.
pressure flow in the plant
source cell, e.g. mesophyll cell 
of leaf where sugar is formed 
(= A)
water loss by evaporation
In the plant, a concentration difference between 
A and B is maintained by conversion of sugar to 
starch in cell B, while light causes production of
sugar by photosynthesis in A.
transpiration stream
xylem
water uptake in root hair
low hydrostatic pressure
here because sugar is
converted to insoluble
starch
sink cell, e.g. starch
storage cell (= B)
mass flow 
along sieve tube 
element from high 
to low 
hydrostatic 
pressure zone
sucrose is actively loaded 
into companion cells 
(not shown) and from 
there into sieve tube 
elements
high hydrostatic pressure 
due to dissolved sugar
chloroplast (site of
sugar manufacture by 
photosynthesis)
sunlight
A
B
 
■Figure B3.2.31 The pressure–flow theory of phloem transport
Concept: Function
The adaptations of phloem tissue ease the flow of sap and enhance loading of carbon 
compounds into phloem sieve tubes at sources and unloading of them at sinks.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How do pressure differences contribute to the movement of materials in an organism?
2	 What processes happen in cycles at each level of biological organization?
