HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
326
B3.3
Muscle and motility
•	 How do muscles contract and cause movement?
•	 What are the benefits to animals of having muscle tissue?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B3.3.1 	 Adaptations for movement as a universal feature of living organisms (HL only)
	 B3.3.2 	 Sliding filament model of muscle contraction (HL only)
	 B3.3.3 	 Role of the protein titin and antagonistic muscles in muscle relaxation (HL only)
	 B3.3.4 	 Structure and function of motor units in skeletal muscle (HL only)
	 B3.3.5 	 Roles of skeletons as anchorage for muscles and as levers (HL only)
	 B3.3.6 	 Movement at a synovial joint (HL only)
	 B3.3.7 	 Range of motion of a joint (HL only)
	 B3.3.8 	 Internal and external intercostal muscles as an example of antagonistic muscle 
action to facilitate internal body movements (HL only)
	 B3.3.9 	 Reasons for locomotion (HL only)
	 B3.3.10 	 Adaptations for swimming in marine mammals (HL only)
Adaptations for movement in living organisms
All organisms carry out movement: it is one of the key processes of life. Motile (or mobile) organisms 
are those that can move from place to place in search of food or reproductive mates, to migrate to 
new areas to escape extreme cold, and so on. Sessile organisms are ones that are fixed to one place 
once they have established a place to live. Some species have a mobile and sessile life stage, for 
example coral. Sessile organisms are fixed in place, but they still show movement of parts of the 
organism, such as cilia.
The cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) is the fastest animal on land and can run at up to 120 km per hour 
(Figure B3.3.1). The cheetah’s backbone is very flexible and is adapted to act like a spring, absorbing 
energy as the animal flexes during running, and converting this energy back into movement. 
The long tail acts as a balance to ensure smooth locomotion. 
Sessile organisms, such as coral, carry out movements to feed. 
The polyp secretes a skeleton of calcium carbonate, which 
renders them immobile. The tentacles of the coral polyp (a 
small animal) contain stinging cells (nematocysts) that kill 
small prey animals, then the tentacles move the prey into the 
central mouth of the polyp. Interestingly, the larvae of coral are 
fully mobile – they are formed when eggs and sperm released 
from sessile coral mix in seawater and fuse together in the 
process of fertilization. 
	
◆Motile: capable 
of locomotion (whole 
organism movement).
	
◆Sessile: fixed in one 
place; immobile.
Concept: Form
Although all 
organisms carry 
out movements, 
some are capable 
of locomotion 
whereas others 
are immobile. Each 
group is adapted to 
its form. 
Theme B 
Form and function – Organisms
 
■Figure B3.3.1 A cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) in pursuit of prey


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
327
Another sessile animal is the barnacle. These animals are 
found on rocky shores and feed by filtering seawater through 
fine hairs on feather-like structures called cirri (Figure B3.3.2): 
when the cirri are drawn back, the food is scraped off into the 
mouth. Sessile organisms can move via external forces but 
are usually attached to something, which provides stability 
and security. 
Plants are largely sessile but also carry out movement. Plants can 
grow towards stimuli, such as light, to maximize photosynthesis 
(this is known as phototropism). The Venus fly trap (Dionaea 
muscipula), a carnivorous plant, feeds on insects. When an insect 
lands on the ‘trap’ and touches a hair on the surface a couple of 
times, it triggers a response where the trap closes (Figure B3.3.3). 
Digestive enzymes are then secreted, which digest the animal.
Top tip!
Motile organisms have many adaptations that sessile 
species do not have, such as wings, legs, flippers, fins, 
webbed feet and so on. Motile animals often have a 
streamlined body to help minimize friction with either air or 
water as they move – this is something that sessile species, 
in general, do not show.
	ATL B3.3A 
Research one terrestrial 
and one aquatic motile 
organism. Find out about their 
adaptations for movement. 
Compare and contrast their 
respective adaptations.
Sliding filament model of muscle contraction
In the previous section, we saw how movement is a feature of all organisms. Some movements are 
passive and are caused by changes in the flow of air and water surrounding the organism. Other 
movements are active, involving muscles. The mechanism of muscle contraction is complex and will 
now be explored.
In Chapter B2.3 (page 269), we examined the structure of striated muscle. In this section, we will 
investigate how muscles contract.
Skeletal muscle fibres are multinucleate and contain specialized endoplasmic reticulum. The striped 
appearance is due to an interlocking arrangement of two types of protein filaments. The thick 
filaments are made of a protein called myosin. They are about 15 nm in diameter. The longer thin 
filaments are made of another protein, actin. Thin filaments are about 7 nm in diameter and are held 
together by transverse bands known as Z lines (Figure B3.3.4). Each repeating unit of the myofibril 
is, for convenience of description, referred to as a sarcomere. So, we can think of a myofibril as 
consisting of a series of sarcomeres, attached end to end.
Top tip!
In skeletal muscle, fibres appear striped under a microscope, so this muscle is also known as 
striated muscle.
Link
Phototropism is 
covered in Chapter 
C3.1, page 510.
 
■Figure B3.3.3 
A Venus fly trap 
(Dionaea muscipula) 
with captured fly
	
◆Myosin: a thick protein 
that forms (together with 
actin) the contractile 
filaments of muscle cells; 
it can convert chemical 
energy in the form of ATP 
to mechanical energy.
	
◆Actin: a thin protein 
that forms (together with 
myosin) the contractile 
filaments of muscle cells; 
contains binding sites for 
the myosin heads.
	
◆Z line: defines the 
lateral boundaries of the 
sarcomere.
	
◆Sarcomere: unit of a 
skeletal (voluntary) muscle 
fibre, between two Z lines.
 
■Figure B3.3.2 Barnacles are sessile, here seen 
filtering plankton from the seawater


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
328
myosin
(thick filament
with ‘heads’)
actin
light band
Z line
Z line
light band
dark band
 
■Figure B3.3.4 The ultrastructure of a myofibril
Z line
individual sarcomere
Z line
electron micrograph of an individual sarcomere
When skeletal muscle contracts in response to nervous stimulation, actin and myosin filaments slide 
past each other, causing shortening of the sarcomeres (Figure B3.3.5). This occurs in a series of steps, 
sometimes described as a ratchet mechanism. ATP is necessary for the contraction process. 
The shortening of the sarcomeres is possible because the thick filaments are composed of many 
myosin molecules, each with a bulbous head that protrudes from the length of the myosin filament. 
Along the actin filament is a complementary series of binding sites into which the bulbous heads fit. 
When the muscle fibres are at rest, the binding sites carry blocking molecules (a protein called 
tropomyosin); so, binding and contraction are not possible at rest.
thick filament = myosin
stretched/relaxed:
electron
micrograph
interpretive
drawing
electron
micrograph
interpretive
drawing
contracted:
thin filament = actin
 
■Figure B3.3.5 Muscle contraction of a single sarcomere
Common 
mistake
Many students think 
that actin and myosin 
are produced in the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum 
(SR). However, SR is 
smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum, with no 
ribosomes associated 
with it. Nor is it 
produced in rough 
endoplasmic reticulum, 
because those proteins 
are used in the muscle 
cells rather than 
exported from them. 
Actin and myosin are 
produced by free-
floating ribosomes 
in the cytoplasm of 
muscle cells.
	
◆Tropomyosin: a 
protein that wraps 
around actin filaments, 
blocking binding sites for 
myosin heads.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
329
Calcium ions play a critical part in the muscle fibre contraction mechanism, together with the 
proteins tropomyosin and troponin. The contraction of a sarcomere is best described in the 
following four steps.
1	 The myofibril is stimulated to contract by the arrival of an action potential (Figure B3.3.6). 
This triggers the release of calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, to surround the actin 
molecules. Calcium ions now react with the protein troponin, which when activated triggers the 
removal of the blocking molecule, tropomyosin. The binding sites are now exposed.
2	 Each bulbous head of myosin, to which ADP and Pi are attached (called a charged bulbous head), 
reacts with a binding site on the actin molecule beside it. The phosphate group (Pi) is dislodged 
(removed) from the head at this moment.
3	 The ADP molecule is then released from the bulbous head; this is the trigger for the rowing 
movement of the head, which tilts by an angle of about 45º, pushing the actin filament along. 
At this step, the power stroke, the myofibril has been shortened (contraction).
4	 Finally, a new molecule of ATP binds to the bulbous head. The protein of the bulbous head 
includes the enzyme ATPase, which catalyses the hydrolysis of ATP. When this reaction occurs, 
the ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) formed remain attached, and the bulbous head is now 
‘charged’ again. The charged head detaches from the binding site and straightens.
Top tip!
Muscles need ATP to release from a contracted state. ATP causes separation of the cross-bridges 
during muscle relaxation. The development of rigor mortis after death is an indicator that energy 
from ATP is directly used to break rather than make cross-bridges – muscles remain contracted after 
death because ATP is no longer available to break cross-bridges.
Common mistake
Students often write incorrect explanations for the role of calcium ions in muscle contraction. 
Calcium ions do not directly form cross-bridges between actin and myosin filaments during muscle 
contraction, but are involved with moving the molecules blocking the myosin binding sites on actin, 
allowing cross-bridges to form. Some YouTube clips on this topic are misleading – all material taken 
from the Internet should be treated with caution!
Muscles are involved in maintaining body posture and in subtle and delicate movements, as well as 
in vigorous or even violent actions. Consequently, nervous control of muscle contraction may cause 
relaxed muscle to contract slightly, moderately or fully, depending on the occasion. In these differing 
states of contraction, the overall lengths of the sarcomeres are changed accordingly.
The relative changes in sarcomere length are illustrated diagrammatically in a single sarcomere in 
Figure B3.3.7.
	
◆Troponin: a protein 
to which calcium binds 
to regulate muscle 
contraction; when calcium 
binds, it triggers the 
removal of the blocking 
molecule, tropomyosin.
	
◆ATPase: a complex of 
integral proteins located 
in the mitochondrial 
inner membrane where 
it catalyses the synthesis 
of ATP from ADP and 
phosphate, driven by a 
flow of protons.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse actin 
and myosin. Myosin is 
a thick filament with 
a head, whereas actin 
is a thinner filament 
without a head.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
330
ATP
ADP
power stroke
P
ADP
ATP
ADP
P
1
2
3
4 cycle is repeated at a binding
site further along the actin molecule
myosin head (with ADP + Pi) binds
to exposed binding site on actin
molecule, and the Pi ion is released
release of the ADP triggers
movement of myosin, by a
‘rowing action’, the power
stroke. The actin filament is
moved
When the action potential
ceases, Ca2+ ions return
to the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
and binding sites become
blocked again.
ATP combines with
myosin head and is hydrolysed
to ADP + Pi, releasing head, and
allowing cross-bridge to straighten
actin filament
binding site exposed
myosin head
cross-bridge
myosin filament
Arrival of action potential at myofibril releases Ca2+ ions from sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Ca2+ ions react with a protein (troponin), activating it. Activated troponin reacts with tropomyosin at the binding sites on
the actin molecules, thereby exposing the binding sites.
Each myosin molecule has a ‘head’ that reacts with ATP →ADP + Pi which remain bound.
 
■Figure B3.3.6 The sliding-filament hypothesis of muscle contraction


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
331
3  moderately contracted
    sarcomere
4  fully contracted
    sarcomere
1  a relaxed sarcomere
2  slightly contracted
    sarcomere
thin filament
(actin)
thick filament
(myosin)
Z line
 
■Figure B3.3.7 Analysing states of contraction in striated muscle fibre
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Processing data
Figure B3.3.8 shows a representation of part of a 
myofibril, seen at a particular stage of contraction. 
This representation is based on an interpretation of an 
electron micrograph. 
Interpret the diagram to identify the approximate state 
of contraction illustrated in the sketch of the electron 
micrograph of a myofibril. Use Figure B3.3.5 to help 
you explain your answer.
 
■Figure B3.3.8 Part of a myofibril at a 
particular stage of contraction 
Now sketch a similar myofibril, fully contracted. Label 
your drawing (showing sarcomere, Z lines, light band 
and dark band). 
Concept: Form and function
Striated muscle tissue takes the form of a repeating series of functional units 
(sarcomeres). By fusing cells together to form a multinuclear structure, the function of 
muscle fibres can be achieved, i.e. to generate force and contract in order to support 
breathing, locomotion and posture (skeletal muscle), and to pump blood throughout 
the body (cardiac muscle).
Role of the protein titin and antagonistic 
muscles in muscle relaxation
Titin is an immense protein found within the sarcomere of striated (and cardiac) muscle (Figure 
B3.3.9). It is the largest protein in the body, composed of some 27 000 amino acids. The titin protein 
is extended when the sarcomeres of skeletal muscle are ‘passively’ stretched by antagonistic muscle 
contraction (i.e. contraction of the opposite muscle). For example, titin in external intercostal 
muscles in the chest is extended and stretched when the internal intercostal muscles contract. 
	
◆Titin: a large 
mechanical protein in 
muscle cells; its main 
function is to act as a 
molecular spring in the 
sarcomeres. 
	
◆Antagonistic 
muscle: a muscle that 
works as one of a pair: 
as one muscle contracts, 
the other muscle relaxes/
lengthens. The muscle 
that is contracting is 
called the agonist and the 
muscle that is relaxing/
lengthening is called the 
antagonist.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
332
myosin
titin
actin
 
■Figure B3.3.9 Diagram showing the position of titin in the sarcomere, before stretching
Antagonistic muscles are needed because muscle tissue can only exert force when it contracts. After 
being stretched, the titin recoils like a spring, shortening the sarcomere after it is stretched. Titin is 
also used to stabilize the myosin (the thick filaments of the sarcomere – see page 327) and centre it 
between the thin actin filaments. It also prevents overstretching of the sarcomere. Titin binds at 
several sites along its length to the actin filaments in the sarcomere, mainly at the edges of the Z line, 
which serves an anchoring function.
Research has shown than in addition to acting as a ‘passive’ spring, the titin protein can create 
‘active’ contraction by folding itself to generate force. The titin molecule undergoes unfolding–
refolding changes as the muscle stretches and recoils.
Structure and function of motor 
units in skeletal muscle
Stimuli (a change in the environment) received by receptors travel through the nervous system via a 
series of neurons. Receptors create an electrical impulse – the action potential (see Chapter C2.2, 
page 471), which passes along sensory neurons via relay neurons (within the central nervous system 
– the brain and spinal cord) and on to motor neurons (Chapter C3.1, page 499). Motor neurons 
connect to effectors (muscle or glands), which carry out the response to the stimulus. 
Motor neurons have the cell body at one end of the neuron, with an axon forming the structure 
through which the action potential passes (Figure B3.3.10).
A neuron is surrounded by many supporting cells, one type of which, Schwann cells, become 
wrapped around the axons of motor neurons, forming a structure called a myelin sheath. Myelin 
consists largely of lipid and has high electrical resistance. Frequent gaps occur along a myelin sheath, 
between the individual Schwann cells. The gaps are called nodes of Ranvier.
Striated muscle fibres are supplied with nerves by a motor neuron nerve ending known as a motor 
end plate or neuromuscular junction, see Figure B3.3.11. This is where the motor neuron connects 
to a muscle cell and is a special type of synapse (see page 476). The chemical transmitter substance 
that diffuses across the synaptic cleft is acetylcholine.
When an action potential arrives at the neuromuscular junction, calcium ions (Ca2+) enter the 
motor neuron and cause synaptic vesicle exocytosis: vesicles of acetylcholine (ACh) move to 
the presynaptic membrane and release ACh into the neuromuscular junction. ACh binds to 
receptors on the sarcolemma (this is the plasma membrane of the muscle fibre). This triggers the 
release of calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytoplasm around the myofibrils 
(Figure B3.3.11). These calcium ions then remove the blocking molecules on the binding sites of 
actin filaments (see above). This starts the sarcomere contraction process. When action potentials 
stop arriving at the muscle fibres, calcium ions return to the sarcoplasmic reticulum and the binding 
sites are again covered by blocking molecules.
Top tip!
When a muscle 
contracts, its 
antagonistic muscle 
stretches. The 
immense protein titin 
helps sarcomeres to 
recoil after stretching 
and also prevents 
overstretching.
Link
Neurons are covered 
in more detail 
in Chapter C2.2, 
page 467.
	
◆Nervous system: 
a complex network 
of neurons that carry 
messages to and from the 
brain and spinal cord to 
various parts of the body.
	
◆Neuron: cell within 
the nervous system that 
carries electrical impulses.
	
◆Motor neuron: nerve 
cell that carries impulses 
away from the central 
nervous system to an 
effector (e.g. muscle, 
gland).
	
◆Effector: a muscle 
or gland that acts in 
response to a stimulus.
	
◆Neuromuscular 
junction: a specialized 
synapse between a motor 
neuron nerve terminal and 
its muscle fibre, responsible 
for converting electrical 
impulses generated by 
the motor neuron into 
electrical activity in the 
muscle fibres.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
333
myelin sheath
node of Ranvier
motor neuron
dendrites
cell body
axon
nucleus
axon
junction between two sheath
cells = node of Ranvier
myelin sheath of nerve fibre
formed by Schwann cell
wrapping itself around the
fibre
motor
end
plates
 
■Figure B3.3.10 A motor neuron
postsynaptic
membrane
synaptic cleft
myelin sheath
axon
mitochondrion
presynaptic membrane
myofibril
sarcoplasm
sarcolemma
vesicle
 
■Figure B3.3.11 The neuromuscular junction


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
334
Roles of skeletons as anchorage 
for muscles and as levers
Locomotion – the movement of whole organisms – is the result of the interactions of nervous, 
muscular and skeletal systems.
Bones support and partially protect the body parts. They also articulate with other bones at 
moveable joints and provide anchorage for the muscles. In mammals, the skeleton consists of the 
axial skeleton (skull and vertebral column) and the appendicular skeleton (limb girdles and limbs). 
 
■The endoskeleton – vertebrates
Vertebrates have an endoskeleton. This is an internal support structure to which muscles are attached 
via tendons. ‘Endo’ means ‘inside’, because the structure lies within the body. Most vertebrates have 
a skeleton made from bone, although in some fish (e.g. sharks) it is made from cartilage. 
 
■The exoskeleton of arthropods
The body and limbs of arthropods (for example, insects) are covered by a tough external skeleton, or 
exoskeleton, with a flexible membrane between the body segments and in the joints of the limbs. 
The muscles for movement are attached to the inside of the skeleton. The arthropod’s legs are a 
series of hollow cylinders made from chitin (a modified polysaccharide that contains nitrogen), held 
together by joints. Across the joints are attached muscles in antagonistic pairs. 
Figure B3.3.12 compares how exoskeletons and bones provide anchorage for muscles and act as 
levers to bring about movement in insects (an example of an arthropod group) and in mammals. 
Insects are arthropods – with an external skeleton and jointed limbs.
locust
Insect leg
in section
Iimb
a’
a
b
b’
a’
a
b
b’
pliable
hinge
hard
exoskeleton
humerus
antagonistic
muscle pairs
shoulder
blade
Movement by 
contraction of
antagonistic pairs 
of muscles
– insect compared 
with mammal
Key:
muscle a → movement a’
muscle b → movement b’
The controlled movement of a limb in any direction depends on the 
balance of opposing contraction of antagonistic pairs of muscles.
 
■Figure B3.3.12 Limb movement – in insects and mammals
	
◆Endoskeleton: an 
internal skeleton, such as 
the bony or cartilaginous 
skeleton of vertebrates.
	
◆Exoskeleton: skeleton 
secreted external to the 
epidermis of the body.
	
◆Chitin: a modified 
structural polysaccharide 
that contains nitrogen, 
used in the exoskeleton of 
insects.
Concept: Form
Some animals 
have exoskeletons, 
which surround the 
body and form an 
impervious outer 
shell, whereas 
others have an 
endoskeleton 
within the body. 
Both systems allow 
muscle attachment, 
contraction and 
movement.
1	 Distinguish 
between an 
endoskeleton and 
an exoskeleton.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
335
 
■Bones, joints and muscles 
as levers 
We use machines to apply forces to objects in 
the world about us. A simple, commonly used 
machine is the lever. The skeleton of an animal, 
together with the muscles attached across the 
joints, functions as a system of levers. Each 
joint acts as a pivot point or fulcrum. The force 
applied (when the muscle contracts) is called 
the effort. The load, or force to be overcome, is 
known as the resistance. The further away from 
the fulcrum the effort is applied, the greater 
the leverage; that is, the smaller the force that 
is required to raise the load. Figure B3.3.13 
shows the arm as an example of a lever system 
in the body.
fulcrum
fulcrum is the
elbow joint
effort
load
biceps (flexor
muscle of 
upper arm)
effort
load
 
■Figure B3.3.13 A lever system in the body
Common 
mistake
Students are often 
unaware that muscles 
only do work when 
they contract. Muscles 
can only contract 
and relax, so work in 
so-called antagonistic 
muscle pairs. They 
cannot actively extend 
or lengthen – extension 
happens as the result 
of contraction of the 
antagonistic muscle.
Movement at a synovial joint
Moveable joints in the body are of different types, but they all permit controlled movements. 
They are known as synovial joints because a thick, viscous fluid – the synovial fluid – is secreted 
and retained in the joint for lubrication. We will consider the hip joint as a synovial joint example.
At the hip is a ball-and-socket joint. In this type of joint, the ball-like surface of one bone (the head 
of the femur of the upper leg in this example) fits into a cup-like depression on another bone (here 
the pelvis) – see Figure B3.3.14. Muscles between the pelvis and the femur allow movement of the 
leg in three planes (see Figure B3.3.15 for more details). Tendons (fibrous connective tissue) attach 
the muscles to the bones, while cartilage, a flexible connective tissue, cushions the ends of bones at 
the joints. It has a smooth, shiny surface to reduce friction and is made of collagen – therefore it has 
very high tensile strength. Ligaments (also a fibrous connective tissue) connect bones to other 
bones, and also help to support internal organs.
Range of motion of a joint
There are contrasting degrees of movement at knee and hip joints, and at the shoulder and elbow. 
This is because of a fundamental difference in the types of joints involved (Figure B3.3.15 and 
Table B3.3.1). 
We have already seen that the hip is a ball-and-socket joint. The shoulder is a similar type of joint. 
This type of joint permits the widest range of movement, in all three planes. This type of movement 
is described as circumduction.
The knee and elbow are hinge joints, which restrict movement to one plane. This is because of 
the shape of the surface of the joint at which the ends of the bones meet and the position of the 
ligaments that hold the bones together. Movements at the elbow and knee are described as flexions 
and extensions.
	
◆Synovial joint: joint 
where a very thin layer 
of viscous synovial fluid 
separates and lubricates 
the two cartilage-covered 
bone surfaces.
	
◆Synovial fluid: 
lubricates the joint, 
nourishes the cartilage 
and removes any 
(harmful) detritus 
from worn bone and 
cartilage surfaces.
Link
Collagen is covered in 
detail in Chapter B1.2, 
page 219.
2	 Distinguish 
between:
a	 bone and 
cartilage 
b	 ligament and 
tendon.
Top tip!
You are not required to 
name the muscles and 
ligaments of the hip 
joint, but you should 
be able to name the 
femur and pelvis. 
Use Figure B3.3.14 to 
help you.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
336
cir
humerus
synovial fluid
cartilage
movement:
cumduction
movement:
extension
flexion
hinge joints occur at elbow (and knee)
here movement is restricted to one plane by the
shape of the articulating surfaces and by the
ligaments that hold the bones together
ball-and-socket joints occur at shoulder
(and hip) and allow movement in three planes;
in contrast with the hip, the ball-and-socket joint
at the shoulder has a shallow socket and is easily
dislocated
Here, movements occur at joints where a cavity filled with fluid (synovial fluid) separates
the articulating surfaces.
hinge joint
ball-and-socket joint
 
■Figure B3.3.15 Movement at shoulder and elbow joints
Concept: Form 
and function
Different types 
of joints have 
different functions 
(Table B3.3.1). The 
form of the joint 
determines its 
function, e.g. range 
of movement.
pelvis
cartilage
socket
femur
ball
synovial fluid
a
tendons
ligament
 
■Figure B3.3.14 Hip joint: a) front view, b) muscle attachments
tendon
muscle
b
pelvis 
3	 Sketch a diagram 
of a ball-and-
socket joint and 
compare it to a 
hinge joint. State 
examples of both 
type of joint.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
337
The range in motion of a joint can be compared in a number of dimensions. Look at Table B3.3.1, 
which compares the range of motion of different joints.
 
■Table B3.3.1 Movement of shoulder and elbow joints compared
Comparison
Shoulder joint
Elbow joint
Type of joint
synovial – ball and socket
synovial – hinge
Articulating bones
shoulder blade and humerus (head)
humerus, radius and ulna
Articulating surface(s)
between shoulder blade and humerus 
between humerus and radius and ulna
Range of motion
circumduction
flexion and extension
A goniometer has two ‘arms’ that are hinged together – one arm is stationary 
and the other movable. Each is positioned at specific points on the body 
with the centre of the goniometer aligned at the joint of interest. Marks 
on the hinge allow the range of movement to be recorded accurately 
(Figure B3.3.16). 
Apps are available for mobile phones that act as goniometers. These use the 
accelerometer and gyroscopic technology of the smartphone to measure 
changes in the position of the phone. Once the app is opened, the phone can 
be put in the position of the part of body being measured, and moved through 
its available range of motion for the joint in question.
Photographs can also be used to measure changes of angle of limbs around a 
joint. Computer analysis of the images can be undertaken.
Tool 2: Technology
Carrying out image analysis
Download a goniometer app on to your smartphone 
(e.g. https://apps.apple.com/us/app/goniometer-plus/
id1081939665) 
First, select the joint you want to investigate. Place your 
device against the limb that will be moving and select 
‘Set 0°’ to establish a relative 0°. Rotate the limb to the 
natural maximum extent (be careful, don’t overextend) 
and then select ‘get reading’. The smartphone will 
record the degree of motion around the joint. 
Compare the movement of different joints, for example 
the hip, shoulder, knee and wrist. Can you relate these 
differences to the structure, form and function of each 
joint? Create a table to compare the different joints 
(using Table B3.3.1 as a template).
Internal and external intercostal muscles as 
an example of antagonistic muscle action 
Intercostal muscles are involved with the ventilation of the lungs (page 276). There are two groups 
of intercostal muscles, internal and external, which work antagonistically (see Figures B3.1.5, 
page 280 and B3.3.17). The internal intercostal muscles attach to the internal surface of the ribs and 
the external intercostal muscles attach to the outer surface of the ribs. The muscles work as follows:
l	 external intercostal muscles contract to pull the ribs up and out
l	 this increases the volume of the thorax and reduces the pressure, forcing air into the lungs
l	 internal intercostal muscles contract to pull the ribs down and in
l	 this decreases the volume of the thorax and increases the pressure, forcing air out of the lungs.
 
■Figure B3.3.16 A goniometer being used 
to measure a joint’s range of motion


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
338
The different orientations of muscle fibres in the internal and external layers of intercostal muscles 
(look carefully at the cut out in Figure B3.3.17) mean that they move the ribcage in opposite 
directions. When one layer contracts it stretches the other, storing potential energy in the sarcomere 
protein titin (see Figure B3.3.9).
Intercostal muscles are generally not used in shallow breathing – the diaphragm contracts and 
relaxes to move air into and out from the lungs in these instances. The intercostal muscles are used 
during more vigorous exercise, when greater volumes of air (and therefore oxygen) are drawn into the 
lungs for increased levels of respiration.
ribs
external
intercostal
muscle
sternum
internal
intercostal
muscle
 
■Figure B3.3.17 External and internal intercostal muscles work antagonistically to ventilate the lungs
 
■Figure B3.3.18 Locomotion in animals: a) a blackbird (Turdus merula) feeding on an earthworm, 
b) a lynx chasing a snowshoe hare, c) an orangutan in a tree, d) a humpback whale mother with her calf
Reasons for locomotion
There are a variety of reasons for locomotion. These include:
l	 foraging for food – all animals must forage for food. Figure B3.3.18a shows a blackbird (Turdus 
merula) feeding on an earthworm. Insects and other invertebrates dominate their diet in spring 
and summer, while seeds and berries are more important in the colder autumn and winter 
months when invertebrates are less abundant. 
l	 escaping from danger – such as prey animals escaping from predators, for example a snowshoe 
hare running from a lynx as in Figure B3.3.18b.
l	 searching for a mate – most great apes, such as gorillas and chimpanzees, live in groups. 
Orangutans (Figure 3.3.18c), in contrast, are solitary animals and spend most of their life 
on their own when adults. This is because their diet is primarily fruit, which is not found in 
sufficient quantities to support big groups. Orangutans only meet up with others of the species 
to reproduce, often travelling large distances through the forest to find a mate.
l	 migration – many animals leave an area where they spend spring and summer to escape the 
colder winter months. For example, many species of whale undertake some of the longest 
migrations on Earth, often swimming many thousands of miles, over several months, so they can 
breed in the warmer waters of the tropics (Figure B3.3.18d). 
a
b
d
c


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
B3.3   Muscle and motility
339
Adaptations for swimming in marine mammals
Marine mammals include seals, sea lions, dugongs, manatees and cetaceans (dolphins, porpoises 
and whales – see Figure B3.3.18d). The aquatic medium they live in is much denser than air, so 
they need specific adaptations to move efficiently through water. Body forms that are suitable for 
life on land offer too much resistance in water (such as hands and feet) or are an obstruction to 
movement (such as flat parts of the body, e.g. the front of the thorax and pelvis). The streamlined, 
hydrodynamic shape of marine mammals reduces the friction (or drag) of water over the body, 
enabling them to move more easily.
Some marine mammals are fully aquatic (they live in water all the time, e.g. whales) whereas others 
are semi-aquatic, living in both water and on land (e.g. seals and sea lions). This influences their 
adaptations. For example, sea lions and seals have different types of tails to dugongs, manatees 
and cetaceans. 
Front limbs have modified pentadactyl limbs to form flippers (pectoral fins), which have a large 
surface area but a streamlined shape to direct body movement. The pelvic bone, which in land 
mammals has attachments for legs, is much reduced in marine mammals and rear limbs are lacking. 
Rear limbs would hinder movement through the water. The tail is modified into a fluke (caudal fin) 
which moves up and down through muscular movements to propel the animal through the water 
(Figure B3.3.18d). 
Common mistake
Because they are of similar size and shape, marine mammals such as whales are sometimes 
confused with large fish such as sharks. One anatomical difference is that shark tails move side to 
side, a different movement from marine mammal flukes, which go up and down.
Other features that would hinder movement through water are also generally lacking, such as 
external ears (although semi-aquatic mammals such as sea lions do have external ears to help locate 
prey on land) and external reproductive organs. The necks of these animals are short and relatively 
immobile to enable fast, muscular swimming.
Marine mammals have specialized skin. The inner-most layer 
of this skin is a layer of blubber (see Chapter A1.1, page 10). 
The blubber covers bone that would otherwise stick up from 
the body and ensures that the skin’s surface is streamlined. 
The outer skin layer also improves hydrodynamics by 
continually exuding oil droplets and shedding epithelial cells. 
The continual shedding of cells ensures that dead skin does 
not build up on the surface of the body and impede movement 
by increasing drag. Oil helps to lubricate the skin, allowing the 
water to pass over it more smoothly.
Cetaceans (whales and dolphins) have adaptations to allow 
periodic breathing between dives. Their nostrils (blowholes) 
are located at the top of the head, which allows them to 
breathe quickly and easily when they surface (Figure B3.3.19). 
Concept: Form
Aquatic marine 
mammals are 
adapted for 
swimming. Their 
streamlined shape 
ensures they can 
move swiftly 
through the aquatic 
environment, and 
limbs are modified 
to propel the animal 
through water.
 
■Figure B3.3.19 An orca off the coast of 
Alaska, exhaling through its blowhole


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme B: Form and function – Organisms
340
Being mammals, they have lungs and so (unlike fish) cannot carry out ventilation while under water. 
This means that they must take a breath before diving and then close the airway to ensure that water 
does not enter. When the animal surfaces, it opens its blowhole and expels air from its lungs, then 
inhaling quickly before closing the blowhole once more before diving. The blowhole remains closed 
while the animal is underwater. Other marine mammals, such as seals and sea lions, do not have 
these adaptations as they can come up on land so do not need blowholes.
	ATL B3.3B 
Research the evolution of marine animals, focusing in particular on cetaceans that evolved from 
land animals to marine mammals. What were the form and function of the land-based ancestors 
of marine species?
Marine mammals have a residual pelvic bone. What do residual structures indicate about the 
evolutionary origin of species?
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of dispersal of offspring from their parents?
2	 In what ways does locomotion contribute to evolution within living organisms?
