B4.1   Adaptation to environment
341
B4.1
Adaptation to environment
•	 How are adaptations and habitats of species related?
•	 What causes the similarities between ecosystems within a terrestrial biome?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B4.1.1 	 Habitat as the place in which a community, species, population or organism lives 
	 B4.1.2 	 Adaptations of organisms to the abiotic environment of their habitat 
	 B4.1.3 	 Abiotic variables affecting species distribution
	 B4.1.4 	 Range of tolerance of a limiting factor
	 B4.1.5 	 Conditions required for coral reef formation
	 B4.1.6 	 Abiotic factors as the determinants of terrestrial biome distribution
	 B4.1.7 	 Biomes as groups of ecosystems with similar communities due to similar abiotic 
conditions and convergent evolution
	 B4.1.8 	 Adaptations to life in hot deserts and tropical rainforest
Note: There is no higher-level only content in B4.1.
Habitats 
The smallest biological unit that an ecologist tends to study is the species. A species is a group of 
organisms that can potentially interbreed to produce fertile offspring. Where a species lives is called 
its habitat, and a complete description of a species’ ecology (where, when and how it lives) is called 
its niche. 
As already discussed, a population is defined as a group of individuals of the same species, and a 
community is defined as all the populations of different species living together and interacting with 
each other. 
Communities form the biotic (living) part of an ecosystem, while the abiotic components (such as 
rocks, water, light and air) comprise the non-living part, with an ecosystem being formed by the 
interaction between communities and their abiotic environment. The environment can be defined 
as the external surroundings that act on an organism, population or community, influencing survival 
and development. Life can be seen as organized within a hierarchy, from species comprised of many 
individuals that form populations, populations that interact with other species’ populations to form 
communities, and communities that interact with the abiotic environment to form ecosystems. 
Common mistake
Make sure you carefully learn the definitions of the terms ‘species’, ‘population’ and ‘community’. 
Students often incorrectly use these words interchangeably. Each word has a precise ecological 
meaning that you need to know and use correctly.
	
◆Habitat: the place 
in which a community, 
species, population or 
organism lives.
Link
For more information 
on species and 
populations, see 
Chapter A3.1, 
page 107; for 
communities see 
Chapter C4.1, 
page 562; for niches 
see Chapter B4.2, 
page 363.
Theme B 
Form and function – Ecosystems


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
342
 
■Microhabitat
Within any ecosystem, organisms are normally found in a particular part or habitat. The habitat is 
the locality in which an organism occurs. So, for example, within a woodland, the tree canopy is the 
habitat of some species of insects and birds, while other organisms occur in the soil. Within a lake, 
habitats might include a reed swamp and open water. If the occupied area is extremely small, we call 
it a microhabitat. The insects that inhabit the crevices in the bark of a tree are in their own 
microhabitat. Conditions in a microhabitat are likely to be very different from conditions in the 
surrounding habitat. 
Top tip!
A description of the habitat of a species can include both geographical and physical locations, and 
the type of ecosystem. For example, the habitat of an orangutan is the rainforests of South East 
Asia, on the islands of Borneo and Sumatra, with a habitat that is largely arboreal (i.e. they live 
above ground and forage in tree canopies).
Adaptations of organisms to the abiotic 
environment of their habitat
 
■Grass species adapted to sand dunes
Marram grass (Ammophila arenaria, Figure B4.1.1) is a species found in coastal sand dune areas in 
Europe and western Asia. 
Marram grass is a xerophyte (xero meaning dry, phyte meaning plant), which is a plant adapted and 
able to survive in an environment with little available water or moisture. Plants with xerophytic 
adaptations are not confined to hot, dry deserts but also:
l	 cold regions due to frozen water (i.e. water is not available to plants)
l	 windy, exposed areas (such as sand dunes).
In windy or hot environments, plants are susceptible to 
increased water loss, either due to increased evaporation (due 
to warmer temperatures) or differences in water concentration 
between the leaf tissue and air (dry air has a reduced water 
concentration, as do windy areas). Species that live in such areas 
therefore need to be adapted to these abiotic conditions. 
Marram grass has a rolled leaf (Figure B4.1.2) rather than 
the usual flat leaves that grasses have. By rolling the leaf, the 
stomata are on the inside of the rolled structure. The inside 
air of the leaf is humid because water vapour that has diffused 
through stomata cannot easily escape the rolled leaf, so their air 
becomes saturated with water. The stomata are protected from 
wind and other air movements. The humid air means that the 
water concentration gradient between the mesophyll tissue and 
the air space is reduced, meaning that the rate of evaporation 
of water is lowered. The inner epidermis is folded and hairy to 
trap water vapour. The hairs limit air movement, again limiting 
evaporative loss of water from the stomata.
	
◆Microhabitat: a 
small-scale habitat 
that differs in abiotic 
and biotic factors from 
the surrounding, more 
extensive habitat.
1	 Define the term 
habitat.
	
◆Xerophyte: a group 
of plants that survive 
in dry areas by having 
features that prevent 
water loss.
 
■Figure B4.1.1 Marram grass growing 
on sand dunes in a coastal area


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
343
The outer epidermis (outer circle) of the marram grass leaf consists of a layer of thick cuticle and 
layers of cells with thick cell walls, to prevent water loss from the outside of the leaf.
 
■Figure B4.1.2 a) Light micrograph of a cross-section of a blade of marram grass (Ammophila arenaria); b) magnified 
section of a marram grass blade to show details of xerophytic adaptations – a layer of thick cuticle and layers of 
cells with thick cell walls in the epidermis, and the inner epidermis is folded and hairy to trap water vapour
a
b
 
■Tree species adapted to mangrove swamps
Mangrove swamps (Figures B4.1.3 and B4.1.4) are found in tropical coastal areas, where the average 
rainfall is generally over 1500 mm yr−1 and insolation (the amount of solar radiation received on a 
given surface in a given time period) is constant throughout year. Mangrove trees grow in a saline 
and oxygen-deficient environment. This harsh environment limits productivity compared with other 
tropical ecosystems, although it is still high. Mangroves provide food, habitats and nursery sites for 
many aquatic species.
Trees that grow in mangrove swamps are exposed to saline (salty) conditions. The roots can be 
submerged under water and so have less access to oxygen than trees that grow in well-aerated soils. 
Aerial roots allow mangroves to absorb oxygen directly from the air and to survive when the forest 
floods with salt water. The roots of mangroves also allow the trees to grow in areas where the ground 
is unstable – the stilt-like roots give the trees stability (Figure B4.1.3).
Some genera of mangrove tree, including Avicennia, Laguncularia and Sonneratia, grow specialized 
roots called pneumatophores: these roots emerge vertically from the ground (Figure B4.1.4). 
Pneumatophores act like snorkels when the forest is flooded and have pores (lenticels) that cover 
their surface where oxygen absorption occurs. The lenticels contain substances that are hydrophobic 
and so, when submerged, water cannot flood the root.
 
■Figure B4.1.3 Aerial roots of 
mangrove in Thailand
 
■Figure B4.1.4 Mangrove pneumatophores 
in the Sundarbans, India
enclosed 
air space
hairs
stomata
vascular 
bundle
epidermis
2	 Create a table 
to outline the 
structural features 
of marram grass to 
prevent water loss 
and the effects of 
those features.
Concept: Form
The form of an 
organism adapts it 
to abiotic variables 
in its environment, 
for example, the 
rolled leaf of a 
marram grass 
helps reduce water 
loss in an arid 
environment, and 
aerial roots help 
mangrove trees 
grow where the 
ground is unstable 
and oxygen is 
limited.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
344
Mangroves trees live in a variety of salty environments, with soils that range from 60–65 parts per 
thousand (ppt) of NaCl, where red mangroves (Rhizophora stylosa) occur, to 90 ppt salinities, where 
black (Avicennia germinans) and white (Laguncularia racemosa) mangroves are found. Mangrove trees 
have adaptations to limit access of salt and to remove it once present in the plant. Other plants do 
not have these adaptations, which gives mangrove trees a competitive advantage in these extreme 
habitats. Root membranes prevent salt from entering while allowing the water to pass through. The 
red mangrove is an example of a salt-excluding species. Other species excrete salt through glands on 
their leaves. Black and white mangroves are both salt excreters. 
3	 Oleander (Nerium oleander), an ornamental flowering 
plant, is a common xerophyte seen in Singapore 
(Figure B4.1.5a). This plant originates from the 
Mediterranean; it is found around stream beds where 
it can endure long seasons of drought followed by 
winter rain.
Use your knowledge of plant structure and function, 
and the information in Figure B4.1.5b, to predict and 
explain four likely characteristics (adaptations) of an 
oleander plant.
     
cuticle
upper epidermis
(multilayered)
palisade mesophyll
bundle sheath
xylem
phloem
spongy mesophyll
sunken stoma
hair
lower epidermis
(multilayered)
 
■Figure B4.1.5 a) Oleander plants (Nerium oleander); b) leaf section through an oleander plant
a
b
Abiotic variables affecting species distribution
Limiting factors are the components of an ecosystem, either biotic or abiotic, that limit the 
distribution or numbers of a population. Limiting biotic factors include interactions between 
organisms, such as competition or predation, while limiting abiotic factors include physical 
components of the environment, such as temperature, salinity, pH, oxygen, carbon dioxide, light, 
hydrostatic pressure, water current, wind velocity, substratum type (layer of rock or soil beneath the 
surface of the ground), rainfall amount and humidity. 
Animals and plants are affected by similar limiting factors (usually biotic ones such as competition – 
see page 557) and ones they do not have in common (usually abiotic ones). Limiting factors in plants 
include light, water, nutrients, carbon dioxide and temperature. In animals, limiting factors include 
food, space, mates and water. ‘Limiting factor’ does not only mean a factor that limits growth, 
development, reproduction or activity of a population by its deficiency – it may also be a limiting 
factor if it is in excess. 
The concept of tolerance suggests that there are levels of environmental factors beyond which a 
population cannot survive. It also suggests that there is an optimum range of these environmental 
factors within which species can exist and thrive. Adaptations of a species give it a range of tolerance.
	
◆Limiting factor: 
any variable that slows 
life processes or stops a 
population from growing.
	
◆Biotic factor: a living 
part of an ecosystem (i.e. 
part of the community) 
that can influence an 
organism or ecosystem.
	
◆Abiotic factor: a 
non-living, physical factor 
that can influence an 
organism or ecosystem, 
e.g. temperature, 
sunlight, pH, salinity or 
precipitation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
345
 
■Zones of stress and limits to tolerance
Nature of science: Models
The law of tolerance was developed by American zoologist Victor Ernest Shelford in 1911. The law 
states that an organism or population has certain minimum, maximum and optimum environmental 
factors that determine success (meaning their survival). The model allowed complex systems to be 
simplified as a diagram (for example, Figure B4.1.6). The distribution of a species can be plotted 
on a graph, showing zones of stress and limits of tolerance. They are models that attempt to 
reflect the real world. However, without complete data for a given species, such models remain 
generalized representations of reality. They are usually shown as bell-shaped curves even though, in 
reality, the distribution of many species may be skewed towards one preferred area of tolerance.
The critical minimal and critical maximum limits are a species’ or population’s limits of 
tolerance. The range of tolerance is the range between critical minimal and critical maximum 
limits of environmental factors affecting an organism. The distribution of a species can be plotted on 
a graph as shown in Figure B4.1.6 below, which represents the frequency at which individuals of the 
species are found under a range of environmental factors.
high
low
optimal range
tolerance range
population size
environmental gradient, e.g. temperature
low
high
zone of
intolerance
zone of
intolerance
zone of
stress
zone of
stress
organisms
absent
organisms
absent
organisms
infrequent
organisms
infrequent
lower limit of
tolerance
upper  limit of
tolerance
 
■Figure B4.1.6 Graph showing zones of stress and limits of tolerance model
The optimum zone of tolerance – the central portion of the curve in Figure B4.1.6 – has conditions 
that favour maximum fitness (that is, reproductive success, in terms of numbers of offspring that 
also have reproductive success), growth, abundance and survival. At either side of the optimal zone 
are the zones of stress, where fewer individuals occur and survival is lower. Organisms are unable to 
reproduce in zones of stress. Beyond the critical minimum and critical maximum limits of 
environmental factors, the organisms cannot occur – these are known as the zones of intolerance. 
Tolerance limits exist for all important environmental factors. For some species, one factor may be 
most important in regulating a species’ distribution and abundance, but, in general, many factors 
interact to affect species distribution.
	
◆Limits of tolerance: 
the upper (i.e. critical 
maximum) and lower (i.e. 
critical minimum) limits 
to the range of particular 
environmental factors 
(e.g. light, temperature, 
availability of water) 
within which an organism 
can survive.
	
◆Range of tolerance: 
range between critical 
minimal and critical 
maximum limits of 
environmental factors 
affecting an organism.
Top tip!
Tolerance ranges are 
not necessarily fixed. 
They can change 
as seasons change, 
as environmental 
conditions change or 
as the life stage of the 
organism changes.
4	 List three abiotic 
variables that 
affect species 
distribution.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
346
Thermal limits of the Pompeii worm
The Pompeii worm (Alvinella pompejana) lives in one of the hottest 
environments on Earth – deep sea hydrothermal vents (Figure B4.1.7). They 
colonize black smoker walls (vent chimneys expelling super-heated fluids that 
have a high concentration of metal ions). They are believed to be one of the 
most heat-tolerant animals on Earth. These worms can reach up to 13 cm in 
length and are pale grey with red, tentacle-like gills on their heads. They live 
in tubes that they make to protect their bodies from excessive heat. Because 
they live at a deep distance below the surface of the water (2500 m) and at 
very high pressures (25 MPa), live specimens have been difficult to study and 
so their heat tolerance limits have remained contentious. 
A research study removed worms from deep sea vents and used a special 
pressure chamber (isobaric sampling device) to transport them to surface 
aquaria that were also kept under high pressure. The animals were subjected 
to three different thermal regimes: a constant mild 20 °C-exposure, and two 
heat exposures at 42 °C and 55 °C, followed by a 3-hour recovery period at 
20 °C. The heat exposures lasted about 2 hours. Cells were removed from 
the animals following heat treatment to establish the amount of cell death. 
The survival of all the animals was established by observing movements, just before sampling their 
body fluid for cells. As well as the observation of vital life signs and cell survivorship, mRNA was 
extracted from the gills and tested for gene transcripts of the hsp70 stress gene; hsp70 proteins are 
known to be activated in response to environmental stresses, such as temperature. The results of the 
experiment are shown in Figure B4.1.8.
A individual survival
100
90
80
60
70
40
30
50
20
10
0
20ºC
42ºC
55ºC
% animal survival
    
B cell mortality
100
90
80
60
70
40
30
50
20
10
0
20ºC
42ºC
55ºC
% coelomocyte mortality 
    
C stress gene
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
20ºC
42ºC
55ºC
hsp70 mean normalized expression
 
■Figure B4.1.8 a) Survival of Pompeii worms under different temperatures, b) percent 
death of cells (coelomocytes – phagocytic white blood cells that appear in the bodies 
of animals that have a coelom) that circulate within the body fluid of Pompeii worms, 
and c) activation of hsp70 gene compared to normal untreated animals
Look at the data carefully. What do the results tell you about the optimal range, lower limit of tolerance 
and upper limit of tolerance of the Pompeii worm? How does the genetic analysis of mRNA support 
the overall conclusions of the experiment?
In the 55 °C experiment, the worms initially showed normal behaviour, when they ventilated their 
tube by moving up and down. After 10 minutes, the worms left their tubes and crawled on the 
surface of the colony. A. pompejana is usually extremely inactive and rarely leaves its tube, so this 
unnatural behaviour showed that the worms were being disturbed. At the end of the experiment 
at 55 °C, all worms were dead, and all showed very serious damage of their tissues and cells.  
 
■Figure B4.1.7 The Pompeii worm 
(Alvinella pompejana)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
347
The worms at 55 °C also showed high mortality of circulating cells. The mRNA extracted from the 
tissues of these animals contained a significantly higher quantity of transcripts for the hsp70 gene 
compared to normal (not heat-treated) animals. The activation of the hsp70 gene confirms that 
thermal exposure up to 55 °C is harmful for A. pompejana. 
In contrast, the 42 °C experiment displayed the highest survival rates at both organism and cellular 
levels, with no observable structural damage in the tissues. The animals did trigger a mild heat stress 
response, but with a level of hsp70 gene expression significantly lower than for the 55 °C specimens.
Interestingly, in the 20 °C experiment, cell mortalities were significantly higher in animals compared 
to the ones kept at 42 °C. Survivorship of individuals was also lower in the 20 °C experiment 
compared to the 42 °C one. In addition, the stress gene expression showed values significantly higher 
in animals subjected to the 20 °C compared to the 42 °C treatment. Specimen survival, cell mortality 
and stress gene expression data, therefore, show that A. pompejana endured more damage from the 
20 °C exposure compared to the 42 °C experiment.
These findings confirm that A. pompejana is a thermophilic species (extremophile): such organisms 
thrive at relatively high temperatures of between 45 °C and 122 °C. The results of this study provide 
the first direct experimental evidence that A. pompejana cannot withstand prolonged exposure to 
temperatures in the 50–55 °C range, and that its thermal optimum lies below 55 °C and above 20 °C.
Recent work has shown that the worms have a layer of bacteria on their back that helps insulate 
them from extreme heat. The worm on its own can only tolerate up to 55 °C but can tolerate higher 
temperatures with the help of bacteria.
Limits of tolerance of crop plants to salt
Plants that can grow in soil or water of high salinity (high NaCl levels) are called halophytes. 
These plants come into contact with saline water through their roots or by salt spray, such as 
occurs in saline semi-deserts (dry areas that have some of the characteristics of a desert but with 
greater annual precipitation), mangrove swamps (see page 343), salt marshes and seashores. Plants 
that are not salt tolerant are called glycophytes; these are damaged fairly easily by high salinity. 
High concentrations of salts in the soil make it harder for roots to extract water, due to osmotic 
effects, and high concentrations of salts can be toxic within the plant. Relatively few plant species are 
halophytes – perhaps under 0.5% of all plant species. Most plant species are glycophytes.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding; evaluating
Data were compiled for a variety of different plant species, including both wild and crop 
species. Salt tolerance was calculated by comparing shoot dry matter of plants exposed 
to NaCl for at least three weeks to the growth of plants grown in the absence of NaCl. 
Species studied were as follows.
l	 Cereal crop plants: rice (Oryza sativa), durum wheat (Triticum turgidum ssp. durum), 
and barley (Hordeum vulgare).
l	 Wild-growing plants: tall wheatgrass (Thinopyrum ponticum), which is used as 
forage and for hay in many places; arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana); alfalfa 
(Medicago sativa), a plant in the pea family that is cultivated to feed livestock; and 
saltbush (Atriplex amnicola), a plant that is endemic to Western Australia and is 
native to the floodplains of the Murchison and Gascoyne Rivers.
Look at Figure B4.1.9, which shows the response of the plant species to salt levels.
➜
TOK
Do researchers have 
different ethical 
responsibilities when 
they are working 
with human subjects 
compared to when 
they are working 
with animals?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
348
NaCl (mM)
0
100
0
200
300
400
600
500
20
40
60
80
100
120
salinity tolerance
(increase in dry matter as % control)
saltbush
Arabidopsis
tall wheatgrass
durum
wheat
barley
rice
alfalfa
 
■Figure B4.1.9 Response of a range of plant crop species to varying 
concentrations of NaCl after three weeks of treatment
1	 What do these data tell us about the limit of tolerance of different plant species to 
salt? Formulate your own conclusion based on this investigation.
2	 Evaluate the data: what were the strengths and limitations of this experiment? 
	ATL B4.1A 
More than 800 million hectares of land throughout the world are affected by salt, more than 
6% of the Earth’s total land area. Forty-five million hectares (20%) of the current 230 million 
hectares of irrigated land are affected by salt. Irrigated land has twice the productivity of land 
supported by rainfall and produces one-third of the world’s food. Understanding the response 
of wild and crop plants to salinity may enable us to reduce the impact of salinity stress on plants, 
improving the performance of species that are important in agriculture. For example, crossing tall 
wheatgrass with its domesticated relative, wheat, can give wheat traits such as stress tolerance to 
saline conditions. 
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) is a small wild-growing cress plant that was the first plant to 
have its genome sequenced, making it a popular tool for understanding the molecular biology of 
many plant traits.
How can knowledge of the genome of Arabidopsis (a salt-sensitive species) be used to compare 
it to more salt-tolerant species, such as its close relative Eutrema halophilum (saltwater cress)? 
How could this information give a more detailed understanding of the molecular basis of 
saline tolerance?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
349
Range of tolerance of a limiting factor
 
■Correlating the distribution of animal species with 
an abiotic variable
Rocky shores are ideal environments to investigate optimum zones of tolerance and critical limits 
because abiotic factors vary dramatically across a small spatial scale between the high and low tide 
lines. Transects can be used to study the distribution of animals and plants along environmental 
gradients. Quadrats (see more in Chapter C4.1, page 550) are used to sample plants, algae and other 
immobile organisms along a transect. There are different types of transect, used depending on need:
l	 A line transect is made by placing a tape measure in the direction of the gradient. For example, 
on a beach this would be at 90° to the sea (Figure B4.1.10). All organisms touching the tape are 
recorded. Many line transects need to be taken to obtain valid quantitative data. 
l	 Larger samples can be taken by using a belt transect; this is a band of chosen width, usually 
between 0.5 m and 1 m, placed along the gradient. 
l	 If the whole transect is sampled, this is called a continuous transect. If samples are taken at 
points of equal distance along the gradient, it is called an interrupted transect. 
l	 Horizontal distances are used if there is no visible vertical change in an interrupted transect, 
such as along a shingle ridge succession (a shingle ridge is a beach covered with small rocks, 
where different communities exist at different distances from the sea). If there is a climb or 
descent in an interrupted transect, then vertical distances are normally used, such as on a 
rocky shore. 
 
■Figure B4.1.10 Line transects being used to study an environmental gradient along a rocky shore
Figure B4.1.11 shows the results of a belt transect study of a seashore community. Data are plotted as 
kite diagrams, where the relative width of each ‘kite’ represents the abundance of an organism at any 
one point along a transect. 
	
◆Transect: arbitrary 
line through a habitat, 
selected to systematically 
sample the community.
	
◆Line transect: a tape is 
laid out in the direction of 
an environmental gradient 
and all organisms touching 
the tape are recorded.
	
◆Belt transect: all 
organisms within a band, 
usually between 0.5 m and 
1 m, are sampled along an 
environmental gradient.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
350
plants
black lichen (Verrucaria maura)
belt transect study of a rocky shore
animals
nerite winkle (Littorina neritoides)
channelled wrack
(Pelvetia canaliculata)
knotted wrack
(Ascophyllum nodosum)
serrated wrack (Fucus serratus)
oar weed (Laminaria sp.)
edible winkle
(Littorina littorea)
smooth winkle
(Littorina obtusata)
dog whelk
(Nucella lapillus)
barnacle
(Chthamalus montagu)
acorn barnacle
(Semibalanus balanoides)
common limpet (Patella vulgata)
spiral wrack (Fucus spiralis)
black wrack (Fucus vesiculosus)
rough winkle (Littorina rudis)
drop in height/cm
sampling stations along the transect/m
Key
rare
occasional
frequent
abundant
dominant
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
high water
midshore
low water
profile transect
data obtained by surveying using
survey poles and a levelling device
 
■Figure B4.1.11 Profile and belt transect analysis of a rocky shore community
5	 From the data in 
Figure B4.1.11, 
suggest one 
plant and one 
animal species that 
appear to be well 
adapted to the 
degree of exposure 
experienced at:
a	 a high-water 
location of the 
shore
b	 a low-water 
location of the 
shore.
6	 Define the term 
transect. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
351
Most parts of the seashore are periodically submerged below seawater, and changes in the tides 
affect the highest point up the rocky shore that is submerged at any one point in a month. Tides are 
controlled by the gravitational pull of the Moon on Earth’s oceans and seas. The shore is an area 
of great diversity and almost all species are of marine origin. The higher an organism occurs on the 
shore, the longer their daily exposure to the air and the less frequent their submersion in water. 
Look at the data in Figure B4.1.11. Which abiotic factor do you think could be correlated with the distribution 
of animal and plants along the transect?
Exposure brings the threat of desiccation (drying out) and wider extremes of temperature than those 
experienced during submersion. Exposure is an abiotic factor that influences the distribution of 
organisms on the seashore.
TOK
If the sampling method causes some members of the population to be less likely to be included 
than others, due to a systematic error, then a sampling bias results. 
To what extent is random sampling a useful tool for scientists, despite the potential for 
sampling bias?
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Making appropriate qualitative observations
Qualitative observations are used to record the conditions in which data are recorded. 
They are descriptive information that reinforce quantitative data. Qualitative 
observations for a fieldwork investigation should include a site description: this could be 
in the form of maps, sketches or photographs with annotations.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data
Set up a transect in a local ecosystem 
(as demonstrated in Figure B4.1.10 for a 
rocky shore) and collect data to correlate 
the distribution of plant or animal species 
with an abiotic variable. Environmental 
gradients can be found on rocky shores, 
in the transition from a forested area 
to open land, and in areas that are in 
succession (see Chapter D4.2). Abiotic 
factors you could use as the independent 
variable include wind speed, soil moisture, 
light intensity, temperature and humidity. 
You could collect this data yourself from 
a natural or semi-natural habitat. Semi-
natural habitats have been influenced by 
humans but are dominated by wild rather 
than cultivated species. Semi-natural 
habitats can include hedges, fields left 
fallow, woods where there is controlled 
logging, and secondary tropical rainforest. 
Use sensors to measure abiotic variables 
such as temperature, light intensity and 
soil pH. 
Interpreting results
What correlation did you find in your 
transect data? What type of graph should 
you draw to show correlation? How can 
you test to see whether the correlation is 
significant or not?
Did you repeat the transect? If not, what 
effect would this have had on your data 
and conclusions?
Concept: Form 
and function
The form and 
function of a 
species determines 
how it interacts 
with its abiotic 
environment. This is 
turn determines its 
distribution along 
an environmental 
gradient. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
352
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Addressing safety and environmental issues 
in an investigation
When planning your transect investigation, what 
relevant safety, ethical or environmental issues must 
you address? Hazards and risks associated with 
fieldwork include:
l	 Terrain (how the land lies). There might be uneven 
surfaces, flat areas, hills and steep gradients. 
l	 Weather conditions can change very quickly in the 
field. A weather forecast should be consulted before 
setting out, and appropriate clothing, footwear and 
supplies selected. In extreme weather, fieldwork 
might have to be postponed or abandoned.
l	 Areas where fieldwork is carried out can be isolated. 
The school and parents who are not going into the 
field must be aware of the route and the expected 
time of return.
l	 Tides can change very quickly. Tide tables should be 
consulted before setting out.
Consider the impact of any investigation on the organisms 
you are studying and the environment they live in, if 
relevant to your study. Bear in mind the IB ethical policy.
Top tip!
When assessing safety, ethics and environmental issues, consider the following: 
l	 evidence of a risk assessment
l	 the application of the IB animal experimentation policy
l	 a reasonable consumption of materials
l	 the use of consent forms in human physiology experimentation
l	 the correct disposal of waste
l	 minimizing the impact of the investigation on field sites.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Compare the outcomes of your investigation in Inquiry 2 to the accepted scientific 
context. Have other scientists carried out similar investigations to yours? If so, were their 
conclusions the same? How can you use this information to evaluate your investigation?
Nature of science: Measurements
Using sensors when making observations helps with data collection. Data loggers can make 
continual measurements of abiotic variables over long periods of time and are more accurate than 
other forms of measurement. They provide more evidence on which to base claims about the 
scientific knowledge under investigation. Inexpensive data loggers can take measurements that can 
be repeated rapidly or automatically over long time periods, even with limited technical expertise. 
There are many different sensors, each measuring different abiotic variables (see Table B4.1.1).
 
■Table B4.1.1 The uses of different sensors in biological investigations
Sensor 
Possible investigation
temperature sensor
air or soil temperature in ecological investigations
balance 
loss in mass due to respiration
light sensor
light intensity in ecological investigations
pH
catalytic and other biochemical reactions involving a change in pH
chest belts and pressure meters
breathing rate
dissolved oxygen
percentage of oxygen in solution 
carbon dioxide sensor
respiration experiments
Top tip!
If you use your 
smartphone to record 
data, you need to 
ensure that the 
measurements taken 
are accurate enough to 
be used in quantitative 
experiments. Ask 
your teacher if you 
are unsure.
Common 
mistake
Some apps display 
graphs that do not 
have proper axes 
showing independent 
and dependent 
variables and exclude 
important features 
such as units. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
353
Tool 2: Technology
Using sensors
Data logging is an electronic method of recording 
physical measurements. Electrical sensors provide 
signals that are calibrated and recorded by a computer 
system, but the main advantage of data logging 
to practical work is in the process of analysing and 
interpreting the raw data.
There are many different sensors, each measuring 
different abiotic variables (see Nature of science box on 
previous page), such as carbon dioxide concentration, 
dissolved oxygen concentration, pH and temperature. 
Decide which sensors you will use when you collect 
data from your transects in Inquiry 2 on page 351.
Sensors are built into smartphones for specific 
purposes, but specific apps can use the sensors as 
external measuring instruments for investigations. 
Others record geographical data, such as iNaturalist, 
which provides a means of recording the geolocation 
of a species in ecological field studies. Apps are 
available on smartphones that allow biological 
principles to be investigated.
Conditions required for coral reef formation
Coral reefs are an example of a marine ecosystem. Tropical coral reefs are found between the tropics 
of Cancer and Capricorn (23.5° N and S of the equator), where seas are warm and there is strong 
sunlight throughout the year. Many reef-building corals have a narrow temperature range in which 
they can thrive and prefer water temperatures that range between 23° C and 29° C.
 
■Factors affecting coral reef formation
Reef-building corals have a symbiotic relationship with a microscopic unicellular algae called 
zooxanthellae. ‘Symbiosis’ means a long-term biological interaction between different species. 
Because zooxanthellae need light to photosynthesize, coral can only grow at relatively shallow depth. 
Most reef-building corals occur in less than 25 m of seawater. As well as light level, the temperature of 
the water is a limiting factor that affects algal survivorship. Corals live at the uppermost boundary of 
their temperature tolerance, and even a 1 °C increase in sea surface temperature can stress 
zooxanthellae, causing the algae to leave the coral. A large-scale loss of zooxanthellae makes coral 
appear white because coral tissue itself is mostly transparent and their calcium carbonate skeletons are 
white. When this ‘bleaching’ occurs, the corals begin to starve as they do not have algae to produce 
glucose; most corals struggle to survive without their zooxanthellae. If conditions return to normal 
relatively quickly, corals can regain their zooxanthellae and survive.
As well as temperature effects, increasing carbon dioxide concentration in seawater lowers the pH, 
making it more acidic – a process referred to as ocean acidification. Increased carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere because of accelerated burning of fossil fuels leads to more dissolved carbon dioxide in the 
oceans. The dissolved carbon dioxide reacts with water to form hydrogen carbonate and hydrogen ions, 
which make the water more acidic. Because the coral reefs are made of calcium carbonate (CaCO3 (s)), 
and are therefore basic, a decrease in pH can lead to reduced calcification rates of corals and destruction 
of existing coral reefs. Calcium carbonate reacts with acid (i.e. hydrogen ions) to form Ca2+ (aq). Sea 
level rises caused by global warming can also result in coral reef reduction, as greater depth means that 
less light reaches the coral, leading to lower rates of photosynthesis in the zooxanthellae.
Top tip!
The factors that affect coral reef formation include: water depth, pH, salinity, clarity and 
temperature. All the factors are in a delicate balance to ensure coral reef growth.
Link
Zooxanthellae and 
their symbiotic 
relationship with coral 
is covered in Chapter 
C4.1, page 567.
	
◆Symbiotic: a close 
and long-term biological 
interaction between 
two different biological 
organisms.
Top tip!
Carbon dioxide is not 
acidic itself. When it 
reacts with water it 
forms carbonic acid, 
which dissociates to 
release ions, specifically 
H+ (aq), which 
cause acidity.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
354
Abiotic factors as the determinants 
of terrestrial biome distribution
Insolation (amount of sunlight), temperature and precipitation affect the type of ecosystem that 
develops in any given area. Each element of the climate plays a role in structuring communities 
within the abiotic environment they inhabit:
l	 Temperature affects the rate of enzyme reactions in the cells of all organisms, affecting the rate 
of primary productivity through photosynthesis and decomposition. Temperature also affects the 
rate of transpiration.
l	 Precipitation affects the rate of photosynthesis and primary productivity.
l	 Insolation also affects the rate of photosynthesis and primary productivity.
Other elements of the climate that can affect ecosystems are air pressure, humidity, cloudiness 
and wind.
Information about the relative contributions of two climatic factors, precipitation and temperature, can 
be used to predict the type of stable ecosystem that can be expected in an area. These two climatic 
variables can be plotted on a graph and the different ecosystems plotted within it (Figure B4.1.12). 
Biomes are groups of ecosystems that share similar abiotic conditions, and so develop similar 
communities through convergent evolution. 
Concept: Form
The form of a biome is determined by the climate in the area it is found. A rainforest, 
for example, is maintained by year-round insolation, plentiful rainfall and warm 
temperatures that maximize growth and productivity.
A climograph is a graphical model that shows the relationship between temperature, precipitation 
and ecosystem type. It was first developed by the plant ecologist RH Whittaker. It shows the likely 
stable ecosystems that are found under specific climatic conditions. Vegetation underpins 
communities found in all different geographical areas, and so factors that affect plant growth strongly 
influence the distribution of different ecosystems. Temperature and rainfall are two of the main 
limiting factors that affect plant growth, so these abiotic factors can be used to model and predict the 
geographical distribution of different ecosystems around the planet. Figure B4.1.12 shows a 
climograph that illustrates the distribution of major terrestrial ecosystems with respect to mean 
annual precipitation and temperature. 
Link
Convergent evolution 
is discussed in 
Chapter A3.2, 
page 136 and 145.
	
◆Climograph: a 
graphical model that 
shows the relationship 
between temperature, 
precipitation and 
ecosystem type.
	
◆Biome: Groups of 
ecosystems with similar 
abiotic conditions and 
communities, defined 
by their climate and 
dominant plant species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
355
mean annual precipitation (cm)
30
50
0
100
200
300
450
150
250
350
400
25
20
15
10
5
–10
–15
mean annual temperature (ºC)
–5
0
arctic-
alpine
cold
temperate
warm
temperate
tropical
tropical
rainforest
tropical
deciduous
forest
desert
shrubland
thorn scrub
temperate
grassland
thorn
woodland
savannah
temperate
  rainforest
boreal
forest
tundra
temperate
  deciduous
    forest
sclerophyllous
woodland
 
■Figure B4.1.12 Whittaker’s climograph
Top tip!
To find the biome that is found under specific climatic conditions, locate the mean annual 
precipitation in cm per year on the x-axis of the climograph. Now locate the mean annual 
temperature on the y-axis. Draw two lines in from these points: where the lines meet is the biome 
found under those conditions. For example, if the mean annual precipitation is 300 cm and mean 
annual temperature 25 °C, the biome found under these conditions is tropical rainforest.
There are different forms of this graph: sometimes the axes are reversed, or the temperature is 
plotted from low to high. In some regions, distribution is determined by soils rather than climate: 
in savannah areas (grassy plains in tropical and subtropical regions with few trees), for example, 
grasslands are found on sandy soil (which is well drained) and forests are found on clay soils (where 
water is retained). The dashed line in Figure B4.1.12 defines ecosystems where factors other than 
rainfall and temperature strongly influence ecosystem structure, such as soil type, the occurrence of 
fire, animal grazing and seasonal drought.
7	 Using Figure B4.1.12:
a	 State the biome found where mean annual precipitation is 25 cm and mean annual 
temperature is 25 °C.
b	 Explain which factor is most important in determining whether an area will be a 
broadleaf forest or a coniferous forest.
c	 Explain which factor is most important in determining whether an area will be a 
grassland or a forest.
Common 
mistake
The climograph 
suggests that each 
ecosystem has a 
distinct ‘edge’ – this 
may, in fact, not be 
the case, with steady 
gradation from one 
ecosystem to another 
rather than distinct 
boundaries. Tropical 
ecosystems, for 
example, graduate 
from highly productive 
rainforest to low-
productive desert. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
356
Biomes
Biomes are groups of ecosystems with similar communities due to similar abiotic conditions and 
convergent evolution. 
Tropic
of Cancer
Tropic
of Capricorn
Equator
Tropical rainforest
Tropical monsoon forest
Mediterranean
Temperate evergreen forest
Deciduous forest
Coniferous forest
Savannah grassland
Temperate grassland
Desert and semi-desert
Tundra
Alpine and ice desert
Key
20
J
J J
FM M
A
ASOND
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
–40
–20
°C
mm
40
30
J
J J
FM M
A
A
Manaus
SOND
500
400
300
200
100
0
0
20
10
°C
mm
40
30
J
J J
FM M
A
A
Bulawayo
SOND
300
200
100
0
0
20
10
°C
mm
30
J
J J
FM M
A
A
Oxford
SOND
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
20
10
0
–10
–20
°C
mm
20
J
J J
FM M
A
A
Kazachye
SOND
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
10
0
–10
–40
–20
–30
°C
mm
Fairbanks
 
■Figure B4.1.13 The global biome map
Rainfall, the amount of sunlight (insolation) throughout the year and temperature all affect the rate of 
photosynthesis in plants in different biomes. The rate of storage of energy in plant biomass through 
photosynthesis is known as productivity. Higher temperatures speed up enzyme reactions that drive 
photosynthesis, although temperatures that are too hot can lead to denaturation of enzymes.
 
■Tropical rainforests 
Tropical rainforests (Figure B4.1.14) have the highest productivity of any biome because they are 
found between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn where rainfall is high (over 2500 mm yr−1), 
insolation is constant throughout the year and temperatures are warm (typically 26 °C). The high 
productivity means that rainforests have a complex structure with a number of layers from ground 
level to canopy, with emergent trees up to 50 metres high and lower layers of shrubs and vines. 
Top tip!
Because tropical rainforests, as their name implies, lie in a 
band around the equator within the tropics of Cancer and 
Capricorn (23.5° N and S), they experience high light levels 
throughout the year. There is little seasonal variation in 
sunlight and temperature (although the monsoon period 
can reduce levels of insolation), providing an all-year 
growing season.
Link
Productivity is 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C4.2, 
page 587.
 
■Figure B4.1.14 Tropical rainforest in Thailand


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
357
 
■Temperate forests
Temperate ecosystems vary from deciduous and evergreen 
forests to grasslands. Temperate forests (Figure B4.1.15) are 
largely found between 40° and 60° N and S of the equator. 
Although temperate forests are highly productive for part 
of the year, seasonal variation in the amount of sunlight 
limits their overall productivity. They are found in seasonal 
areas where winters are cold and summers are warm (unlike 
tropical rainforests, which have similar conditions all year 
round). Rainfall and temperature are also seasonal, which 
further reduces the overall productivity compared to tropical 
rainforests. Lower levels of productivity mean less stored 
chemical energy by plants and other autotrophs. At these mid-
latitudes, the amount of rainfall determines whether an area 
develops forest. Rainfall is sufficient in temperate forest areas to 
establish forest (500–1500 mm yr−1) rather than grassland.
 
■Taiga
Taiga (northern coniferous forest) is a biome characterized by 
coniferous forests consisting mostly of pines (Figure B4.1.16). 
It is found between northern latitudes of 50° and 70°, near 
to the Arctic Circle. The climate is extremely cold (winds 
blow cold Arctic air into the biome), harsh, with a low rate 
of precipitation (snow and rain) and a short growing season. 
Long, severe winters can last up to 6 months. Mean annual 
temperatures range from a few degrees Celsius above freezing 
down to −10 °C. Summers are short, lasting around 50 to 100 
days without frost. Snow cover affects the climate because 
the snow reflects incoming solar radiation and increases 
cooling. Taiga is located south of the tundra biome, which 
is characterized by a land frozen by ice and constant snow 
(see below).
 
■Figure B4.1.15 A temperate forest in the UK
The taiga is the world’s largest land biome (covering around 27% of Earth’s land surface), ranging 
from North America (where it covers most of Canada, Alaska and parts of the northern United 
States), Eurasia (where it covers most of Sweden, Finland, much of Russia – including two-thirds of 
Siberia – and large areas of Norway and Estonia). It is also found in Iceland, and areas of northern 
Kazakhstan, northern Mongolia and northern Japan (on the island of Hokkaido¯).
 
■Figure B4.1.16 Taiga forest in Canada


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
358
 
■Grasslands 
The grassland biome is found on every continent except 
Antarctica and covers about 16% of Earth’s surface (Figure 
B4.1.17). Grasslands develop where there is not enough 
precipitation to support forests, but there is enough to prevent 
deserts forming. There are several types of grassland: the Great 
Plains and the Russian Steppes are temperate grasslands; the 
savannahs of east Africa are tropical grasslands.
Grasses have a wide diversity but low levels of productivity. Away 
from the sea, grasslands have wildly fluctuating temperatures, 
which can limit the survival of animals and plants. The mixing 
of cold polar air with warmer southerly winds (in the northern 
hemisphere) causes increased precipitation compared to polar 
and desert regions. Rainfall is approximately in balance with 
levels of evaporation. Grasses grow beneath the surface and, 
during cold periods (northern grasslands suffer a harsh winter), 
can remain dormant until the ground warms.
 
■Tundra
In colder ecosystems found in the northern hemisphere, 
such as tundra, water is locked up as ice and is not available 
to plants, reducing productivity. It is a highly stressful 
environment, with very low temperatures and low rainfall, 
so only mosses and lichens may be able to survive (Figure 
B4.1.18). Most of the world’s tundra is found in the northern 
polar region, and so is known as Arctic tundra. There is a small 
amount of tundra in parts of Antarctica that are not covered 
with ice, however, and in lower latitudes on high altitude 
mountains (alpine tundra).
 
■Figure B4.1.17 The Serengeti grasslands of Tanzania
Tundra is found at high latitudes where insolation is low. Short daytime lengths also limit the levels 
of sunlight. Temperatures are very low for most of the year, which is a limiting factor because it 
affects the rate of photosynthesis, respiration and decomposition (these enzyme-driven chemical 
reactions are slower in colder conditions). Due to the low temperatures, water may be locked up in 
ice for months at a time and this, combined with little rainfall, means that water is also a limiting 
factor. The low light intensity and rainfall mean that rates of photosynthesis and productivity are low. 
Soil may be permanently frozen (permafrost) and nutrients are also limited. The vegetation consists 
of low scrubs and grasses.
During winter months temperatures can fall to −50 °C. All life activity is low in these harsh 
conditions. In the summer the tundra changes: the Sun is out almost 24 hours a day, so levels of 
insolation and temperature both increase, leading to plant growth. Only small plants are found 
in this biome because there is not enough soil for trees to grow and, even in the summer, there is 
permafrost only a few centimetres below the surface.
 
■Figure B4.1.18 Alaskan tundra


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
359
 
■Hot deserts
A ‘hot’ desert is a part of the world that has high average temperatures and very low rainfall. Deserts 
are found in bands at latitudes of approximately 30° N and S (Figure B4.1.19). They cover 20–30% of 
the land surface. Here, dry air descends having lost its water vapour over the tropics. 
The Sahara Desert in northern Africa is the world’s largest hot desert. Covering approximately 
9.2 million square kilometres (3.6 million square miles), it is only slightly smaller than the USA 
(9.8 million square kilometres, 3.8 million square miles)! 
Hot deserts are characterized by high temperatures at the warmest time of day (typically 45–9 °C) in 
the early afternoon together with low levels of precipitation (typically under 250 mm yr−1), which may 
be unevenly distributed. The lack of water limits rates of photosynthesis and so rates of productivity 
are very low. Organisms also must overcome fluctuations in temperature (the temperatures at night 
when the sky is clear can drop to 10 °C, sometimes as low as 0 °C), which makes survival difficult. 
Australian
Desert
Kalahari
Desert
Namib
Desert
Sahara Desert
Atacama
Desert
Sechura
Desert
Sonoran
Desert
Mojave
Desert
Somali
Desert
Arabian
Desert
Gobi
Desert
Thar
Desert
Taklan Makan
Turkestan
Desert
Dasht-e-Lut
 
■Figure B4.1.19 Location of hot deserts around the world
Adaptations to life in hot deserts 
and tropical rainforest
 
■Hot desert
There are three methods plants and animals use to live in a hot desert:
l	 Expire: when the conditions are too extreme, parent organisms die but leave behind tough seeds 
or eggs.
l	 Evade: avoid extreme temperatures by changing activity from day to night or from above ground 
to below. Kangaroo rats (see below) sleep in their burrows during the hot day.
l	 Endure: adaptations enable plants and animals to survive in this extreme environment, such as 
the cactus (see below). Fatty deposits stored by animals in their tails and other tissues can be 
used as a respiratory substrate, releasing water. Water can be stored in the roots, stems and/or 
leaves of plants (plants that do this are called succulents, e.g. cacti).
8	 Define the term 
biome.
9	 Compare and 
contrast the 
distribution of two 
terrestrial biomes.
Concept: Form
Organisms in hot 
deserts and tropical 
rainforests are 
adapted to the 
specific conditions 
they live in. 
Abiotic conditions 
determine the form 
of these species.
Common 
mistake
Deserts are areas 
where water is 
generally inaccessible 
and vegetation is 
sparse. Antarctica is 
therefore classified as 
a desert (the water 
needed by organisms 
is largely locked up 
as ice) but it is a cold 
desert, as opposed to a 
hot desert such as the 
Sahara. It is therefore 
incorrect to say all 
deserts are hot.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
360
Camels
Camels live in deserts that are hot and dry during the day and cold at night. They need to cope with 
wind-blown sand as well as a lack of water. They are well adapted for survival in the desert. Camels 
can tolerate a body temperature of up to 42 °C. They have thick fur on the top of their body for shade 
and thin fur elsewhere to allow easy heat loss. Their long neck and legs increase their surface area for 
heat loss.
Camels also have large, flat feet to spread their mass on the sand to reduce the pressure. They lose 
very little water through urination and sweating. The fat in the hump on their back can be converted 
to metabolic water via respiration. Slit-like nostrils, which can close, and two rows of eyelashes help 
to keep the sand of out their nose and eyes.
Cacti
Cacti (Figure B4.1.20) have no leaves, so photosynthesis occurs in their stem to reduce surface area. 
Their rounded and spherical shapes also reduce their surface area-to-volume ratio to limit water loss 
through transpiration. A thick, waxy cuticle further prevents water loss through their surface. They 
can store large quantities of water in collapsible water-storage cells found in the stem (although some 
cacti also store water in their roots) and are covered with needles (modified leaves) to deter mammals 
from eating the succulent flesh of the cactus and getting access to water stores. Cacti have shallow, 
wide-spread root systems to ensure that any precipitation is rapidly absorbed before it evaporates. 
They also have deep roots to reach sources of water beneath the surface. 
Scorpions
Scorpions (Figure B4.1.21) are nocturnal arthropods, so they are active at night and live underground 
to avoid hot daytime temperatures. They are opportunistic predators, having a wide range of prey, 
and use a venomous sting to kill prey. They wait for prey to come near to them and carry out ambush 
attacks rather than chasing down prey, which saves energy. Their exoskeletons give them protection 
and prevents water loss, and their low food and water needs allow them to survive in desert 
environments. Scorpions use their eight legs to detect movement. The movements of prey animals 
cause the sand’s surface to vibrate slightly, which the scorpion can detect and estimate the direction 
and distance to its prey.
Kangaroo rats
Animals of arid or desert regions clearly survive with little or no liquid water in their diets. This 
group of animals includes the kangaroo rat (Dipodomys species, Figure B4.1.22), which lives in hot 
dry deserts, hiding in a burrow during daylight. It can survive without access to drinking water. 
Physiologists have investigated the metabolism, diet, and breathing and excretory losses of water in 
the kangaroo rat. They excrete extremely concentrated urine and produce no sweat, which explains 
why survival is possible for a well-adapted organism. Other desert species show similar adaptations. 
 
■Tropical rainforests
The complex structure of tropical rainforest has a number of layers from ground level to canopy. 
Emergent trees grow above the canopy, and there are lower layers of shrubs and vines. The range of 
different conditions and the complexity of the ecosystem means that organisms display a wide range 
of adaptations to survive in this highly competitive environment.
 
■Figure B4.1.21 
Granulated thick-tailed 
scorpion (Parabuthus 
granulatus) in the 
Kalahari desert, 
South Africa
 
■Figure B4.1.20 Cacti 
growing in the Andes 
in South America
 
■Figure B4.1.22 
Kangaroo rat


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.1   Adaptation to environment
361
Pitcher plants
Pitcher plants are carnivorous plants, with some found in the canopy of tropical 
rainforest and in areas with nutrient-poor soils (Nepenthes species). Pitcher plants can 
photosynthesize to provide glucose for respiration and growth, but lack other nutrients 
from the immediate environment needed for metabolic processes in cells (such as 
nitrogen to make amino acids). They can survive in areas of low nutrients, such as the 
canopy of rainforest where plants grow epiphytically (directly on the host tree rather 
than in soil), because they catch and digest insects. The pitcher is grown from modified 
leaves, which fold into a cup-shaped trap. Digestive enzymes are secreted by the pitcher, 
and downward-pointing spines prevent trapped insects from escaping. Animals provide 
the nutrients, such as a source of nitrogen, otherwise lacking from the environment of 
the pitcher. Some larger pitcher plants, such as Nepenthes rajah, use the faeces of small 
mammals such as tree shrews as a source of nourishment – these animals are attracted 
to the pitcher by a sweet secretion and use the pitcher as a toilet; both organisms benefit 
from this mutualistic relationship.
Flying lizards
The extended vertical dimension provided by tropical rainforest provides an alternative 
form of locomotion for some animal species. Rather than walk along the forest 
floor, they have developed adaptations to glide from tree to tree. The forest floor is 
a dangerous place, home to many potential predators; living above the forest floor 
enables prey to evade predation (and saves energy by not having to regularly run away 
from danger). One such animal is the flying lizard (Draco species), see Figure B4.1.24. 
These tiny lizards (usually reaching lengths of about 20 cm) have folds of skin that rest 
flat against the body when not in use but act as wings when stretched tight between 
extended ribs, allowing them to glide from one tree to another. 
Gibbons
Gibbons (Hylobates species) are lesser apes found in the rainforests of South East Asia 
(Figure B4.1.25). They have elongated forearms to help them swing from tree to tree 
(a form of locomotion known as brachiation). Gibbons also have hook-like fingers and 
high mobility in their shoulder joints to help with the swinging motion. Gibbons very 
rarely, if ever, descend to the forest floor – their body is adapted to their arboreal (tree-
living) habitat.
Orchid mantis
Mimicry, where one species copies the appearance of another, is one strategy to survive 
in rainforest. The orchid mantis (Hymenopus coronatus) is so called because it mimics 
the look of an orchid flower. Its four legs resemble flower petals (Figure B4.1.26a). The 
insect attracts pollinators to its flower-like structure and uses its forelimbs to attack and 
kill its prey.
The young of the orchid mantis (the first instar) are dark orange with black legs and a 
black head (Figure B4.1.26b). These small insects do not resemble orchid flowers, but 
rather the unopened buds of a flowering tree species.
 
■Figure B4.1.24 Draco lizard 
gliding in rainforest in Thailand
 
■Figure B4.1.25 A Lar gibbon 
(Hylobates lar) swinging 
from tree to tree
 
■Figure B4.1.23 Pitcher plants growing 
in the canopy of tropical rainforest


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
362
 
■Figure B4.1.26 a) An orchid mantis (Hymenopus coronatus) sitting on an orchid, 
from the tropical forests of South East Asia; b) young orchid mantis
a
b
Mimicry is a very effective adaptation, and it is crucial to the survival of many species. Other animals 
that use this type of camouflage in tropical rainforests include beetles, caterpillars, moths, lizards, 
snakes and frogs.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the properties of the components of biological systems?
2	 Is light essential for life?
10	Suggest why the 
adult orchid mantis 
looks different to 
the young (first 
instar) orchid 
mantis.
