B4.2   Ecological niches
363
B4.2
Ecological niches
•	 What are the advantages of specialized modes of nutrition to living organisms?
•	 How are the adaptations of a species related to its niche in an ecosystem?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 B4.2.1 	 Ecological niche as the role of a species in an ecosystem
	 B4.2.2 	 Differences between organisms that are obligate anaerobes, facultative 
anaerobes and obligate aerobes
	 B4.2.3 	 Photosynthesis as the mode of nutrition in plants, algae and several groups of 
photosynthetic prokaryotes
	 B4.2.4 	 Holozoic nutrition in animals
	 B4.2.5 	 Mixotrophic nutrition in some protists
	 B4.2.6 	 Saprotrophic nutrition in some fungi and bacteria
	 B4.2.7 	 Diversity of nutrition in archaea
	 B4.2.8 	 Relationship between dentition and the diet of omnivorous and herbivorous 
representative members of the family Hominidae
	 B4.2.9 	 Adaptations of herbivores for feeding on plants and of plants for resisting 
herbivory
	 B4.2.10 	Adaptations of predators for finding, catching and killing prey, and of prey 
animals for resisting predation
	 B4.2.11 	Adaptations of plant form for harvesting light
	 B4.2.12 	Fundamental and realized niches
	 B4.2.13 	Competitive exclusion and the uniqueness of ecological niches
Note: There is no higher-level only content in B4.2.
Ecological niches
Communities are made up of many interacting species. Each species plays a unique role within a 
community because of the unique combination of its spatial habitat and interactions with other 
species. A complete description of a species’ place within a community is known as its niche. 
A species’ niche depends not only on where it lives (its habitat), but also on what it does. 
For example, the niche of a lion includes all the information that defines this species: its habitat, 
courtship displays, grooming, alertness to prey, when it is active, interactions with other species, and 
so on. The niche of a species includes the biotic and abiotic interactions that influence the growth, 
survival and reproduction of the species, including how it obtains food.
No two species can have the same niche, because the niche completely defines a species and the 
role that species has in an ecosystem. Two organisms could temporarily occupy the same niche, 
leading to evolutionary processes (see page 378) or competitive exclusion (see page 378 this section).
The principle of distinct niches can be illustrated by two common and rather similar seabirds, the 
cormorant and the shag (Figure B4.2.1). 
	
◆Niche: the role 
played by a species in 
its community, which 
includes its abiotic 
requirements and 
tolerances, and its 
interactions with other 
organisms.
Theme B 
Form and function – Ecosystems


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
364
shag (Gulosus aristotelis) 
surface-swimming prey
cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo)
diet is a key difference in the niches of these otherwise similar birds
bottom-feeding prey
sand eels
herring
flatfish
shrimps,
prawns
prey
shag
cormorant
% of prey taken by
0
26
33
33
49
1
2
1
 
■Figure B4.2.1 Different niches of two very similar species of bird: the 
cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo) and the shag (Gulosus aristotelis)
The cormorant and the shag live and feed along the coastline and they rear their young on similar 
cliffs and rock systems. It looks like they share the same habitat. However, their diet and behaviour 
are different. The cormorant feeds close to the shore on seabed fish, such as flatfish. The shag builds 
its nest on much narrower cliff ledges. It also feeds further out to sea, capturing fish and eels from 
the upper layers of the waters. Since these birds feed differently and have different behavioural 
patterns, although they occur in close proximity, they avoid competition with each other. 
They therefore occupy different niches.
Obligate anaerobes, facultative 
anaerobes and obligate aerobes
The earliest life on Earth evolved in an environment where oxygen was absent from the atmosphere. 
The first life on Earth therefore carried out anaerobic respiration (i.e. respiration that does not require 
oxygen), and all niches would have been anaerobic. Following the evolution of photosynthetic 
organisms that produced oxygen, the concentration of oxygen in the atmosphere increased, enabling 
the evolution of prokaryotes that made use of this new resource, and the development of niches that 
were aerobic. By evolving into different niches, they avoided competition with the anaerobic species. 
As oxygen levels increased, anaerobic species retreated into environments with little or no oxygen, 
for example the intestines and stomachs of mammals.
1	 Using Figure 
B4.2.1, state 
one difference 
between the niche 
of a cormorant 
(Phalacrocorax 
carbo) and the 
shag (Gulosus 
aristotelis).
Concept: 
Function
The role of a 
species in its 
environment is 
defined by its 
niche. Each species 
has a unique niche 
that differentiates it 
from other species. 
Link
Respiration (aerobic 
and anaerobic) is 
covered in detail 
in Chapter C1.2, 
page 408.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
365
Respiration takes place in every living cell. For respiration, many micro-organisms require oxygen; 
they can only respire aerobically (these are known as obligate aerobes). An example of an obligate 
aerobe is Mycobacterium tuberculosis (the bacteria that causes the disease TB – see page 537). Other 
organisms only respire in the absence of oxygen (obligate anaerobes): these microbes are poisoned 
by the presence of oxygen because they lack defence mechanisms to protect enzymes from oxidants. 
An example of obligate anaerobes are methane-producing archaea (see Diversity of nutrition in 
archaea, later in the chapter). A third group of organisms normally respire aerobically but have the 
facility to switch to anaerobic respiration in the absence of oxygen (facultative anaerobes), such as 
Escherichia coli (E. coli) which normally lives in the intestines of animals but can also exist in water, 
food, soil or on surfaces that have been contaminated with animal or human faeces. The biochemical 
pathways involved in respiration are summarized in Figure B4.2.2. 
alcoholic fermentation forms
carbon dioxide and ethanol as
waste products
other
carbohydrate
substrates
for respiration
lipid
protein
reduced hydrogen
acceptor (NAD)
          +
carbon dioxide
common to
aerobic and
anaerobic
respiration
ATP
+
water
ethanol
+
CO2
lactic
acid
or
terminal oxidation
+
oxidative phosphorylation
microorganisms that
ONLY respire
aerobically are
called
obligate aerobes
microorganisms that
respire by either
pathway (according to
environmental conditions)
are called
facultative anaerobes
lactic acid fermentation
forms lactic acid as
waste product
microorganisms
that ONLY respire
anaerobically are
called
obligate anaerobes
aerobic
respiration
     +
oxygen
glucose
glycolysis
pyruvate
Krebs cycle
 
■Figure B4.2.2 Classification of micro-organisms by respiration
Different modes of nutrition
As well as type of respiration, another factor that determines the niche of a species is its mode 
of nutrition. Species living in the same habitat can be distinguished by feeding in different ways. 
There are a variety of modes of nutrition.
	
◆Obligate aerobes: 
organisms that can only 
respire aerobically.
	
◆Obligate anaerobes: 
organisms that only 
respire in the absence of 
oxygen.
	
◆Facultative 
anaerobe: organism 
that normally respires 
aerobically but has the 
facility to switch to 
anaerobic respiration in 
the absence of oxygen.
2	 Define the term 
obligate aerobe.
3	 Outline the 
differences 
between obligate 
and facultative 
anaerobes.
Top tip!
The tolerance of 
obligate anaerobes, 
facultative anaerobes 
and obligate aerobes 
is determined by the 
presence or absence 
of oxygen gas in 
their environment.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
366
 
■The nutrition of micro-organisms
Microbes can also be grouped according to their nutrition. Micro-organisms are either autotrophic, 
that is, they make their own organic molecules using an external source of energy, or heterotrophic, 
relying on a supply of ready-made complex food substances. The different types of autotrophic and 
heterotrophic nutrition are explored next.
Common mistake
Energy cannot be created or destroyed, so it is incorrect to say that autotrophs make their own 
energy. Autotrophs convert energy from one form (sunlight) into another (chemical energy in the 
form of food). Autotrophs produce their own food, not their own energy.
 
■Photosynthesis in plants, algae and photosynthetic prokaryotes
Plants contain pigments, such as chlorophyll, so they can absorb solar energy (sunlight) and convert 
this into chemical energy – the process of photosynthesis. As well as the pigments, they contain the 
necessary metabolic processes to reduce carbon dioxide and produce glucose (and oxygen), see 
page 425. The great majority of green plants are entirely autotrophic in their nutrition. As they use 
sunlight in their autotrophic nutrition, they are called photoautotrophs. Because of this, they play a 
key part at the beginning of food chains (page 581). Other organisms also contain pigments, and so 
are also autotrophic. These include algae (a group of protists) and photosynthetic bacteria (see 
below). Cyanobacteria (a group of aquatic photosynthetic bacteria) were the first photosynthetic 
organisms on Earth, evolving some 3.7 billion years ago, leading to a dramatic change in the 
atmosphere (see Chapter A2.1, page 34).
 
■Holozoic nutrition in animals
In contrast to green plants, animals and most other types of organism use only existing nutrients, 
which they obtain by digestion and then absorption into their cells and tissues for assimilation 
(use in the body). Consequently, animal nutrition is dependent on plant nutrition, either directly 
or indirectly. In ecology, animals are known as consumers and animal nutrition is described as 
heterotrophic (meaning ‘other nutrition’).
Top tip!
A heterotroph is an organism that obtains organic molecules from other organisms. A consumer is 
an organism that ingests other organic matter that is living or recently killed.
All animals are heterotrophic and most – but not all – are consumers (holozoic). In holozoic 
nutrition, food is ingested, digested internally, absorbed and assimilated.
Note that some of the consumers, known as herbivores, feed directly and exclusively on plants. 
Herbivores are primary consumers. Animals that feed exclusively on other animals are carnivores. 
Carnivores that feed on primary consumers are known as secondary consumers. Carnivores that 
feed on secondary consumers are called tertiary consumers, and so on.
	
◆Autotrophic: using 
external energy sources 
to synthesize glucose 
from simple inorganic 
substances.
	
◆Heterotrophic: 
using carbon compounds 
obtained from other 
organisms to synthesize 
required carbon 
compounds.
Link
The process of 
photosynthesis is 
covered in detail 
in Chapter C1.3, 
page 425.
	
◆Photoautotroph: an 
organism that uses light 
energy to generate ATP 
and to produce glucose 
from inorganic substances.
	
◆Holozoic: nutrition in 
consumers where food 
is ingested, digested 
internally, absorbed and 
assimilated.
	
◆Herbivore: an animal 
that feeds (holozoically) 
exclusively on plants.
	
◆Carnivore: flesh-
eating organism.
Link
Herbivores, carnivores 
and consumers are 
covered in detail 
in Chapter C4.2, 
page 585.
Top tip!
Autotrophs use 
inorganic molecules 
while heterotrophs use 
organic molecules in 
their nutrition.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
367
Top tip!
An animal takes in food (complex organic matter) and digests it in the alimentary canal or gut, 
producing molecules that can be taken up into the body’s cells via the blood circulation system. 
This is known as holozoic nutrition (meaning ‘feeding like an animal’). Holozoic nutrition is just one 
of the forms of heterotrophic nutrition (meaning ‘feeding on complex, ready-made foods’) to obtain 
the required nutrients. All heterotrophs are dependent, directly or indirectly, on organisms that 
manufacture their own food (autotrophs).
 
■Mixotrophic nutrition in some protists
Some organisms carry out both autotrophic and heterotrophic nutrition. These organisms are known as 
mixotrophs, and their form of feeding mixotrophic nutrition. We have already seen how pitcher 
plants are carnivorous, feeding on captured insects (page 360), while also carrying out photosynthesis. 
Some animals contain algae within their tissues. Many marine flatworms have algae living 
symbiotically within their bodies (a form of endosymbiosis – see also Chapter A2.2, page 82) such 
as many species of Convoluta. Many species of coral can live in symbiosis with algae (see page 567). 
Euglena is a well-known freshwater example of a protist that is both autotrophic and heterotrophic 
(Figure B4.2.3). Many other mixotrophic species are part of oceanic plankton (see below). 
     
In heterotrophic nutrition, bacteria are taken into food
vacuoles by phagocytosis and the contents digested by
hydrolytic enzymes from lysosomes. 
In autotrophic nutrition, photosynthesis occurs in the
chloroplasts. There is a light-sensitive ‘eyespot’ present
which enables Euglena to detect the light source.
Notice the plasma membrane has a ridged appearance
here – this arrangement is supported by a system of
microtubules below.
 
■Figure B4.2.3 False-colour micrograph of Euglena, a species that is both autotrophic and 
heterotrophic (magnification ×40 000)
Some mixotrophs are obligate (meaning they always carry out both forms of nutrition, such as 
Euglena) and others are facultative (meaning they sometimes carry out both but can be either 
autotrophic or heterotrophic). Many phytoplankton (a type of alga), such as Cryptomonas sp., are 
facultative mixotrophs because they take up dissolved organic carbon or, under inorganic nutrient 
stress (when they lack access to key nutrients), use dissolved amino acids or other organic sources of 
nitrogen. The uptake of dissolved organic material is known as osmotrophy. 
 
■Saprotrophic nutrition in some fungi and bacteria
Eventually, all producers and consumers die and decay. Organisms that feed on dead plants and 
animals, and on the waste matter of animals, are described as saprotrophs (meaning ‘putrid 
feeding’). Fungi and bacteria with this mode of heterotrophic nutrition can be referred to 
as decomposers.
	
◆Mixotrophic 
nutrition: nutrition that 
is both autotrophic and 
heterotrophic.
4	 Calculate the 
actual size of the 
organism shown in 
Figure B4.2.3.
Link
Decomposers and 
detritivores are 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C4.2, 
page 590.
	
◆Saprotroph: an 
organism that lives on or 
in dead organic matter, 
secreting digestive 
enzymes into it and 
absorbing the products of 
digestion.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
368
Feeding by saprotrophs releases inorganic nutrients from the dead organic matter, including carbon 
dioxide, water, ammonia, amines, and ions such as nitrates and phosphates. These inorganic 
nutrients are then absorbed by green plants and reused.   
Top tip!
A detritivore is an organism that ingests dead organic matter, demonstrating 
holozoic nutrition. Decomposers secrete enzymes and digest food outside 
the body, absorbing the products of digestion. Decomposers demonstrate 
saprotrophic nutrition.
Top tip!
Make sure you can distinguish key terms such 
as autotroph, heterotroph, detritivore and 
saprotroph. Learn this comparative language 
carefully and then apply it accurately.
Common mistake
Saprotrophs obtain energy from external 
digestion – it is incorrect to say that this is the 
‘recycling of energy’ as they will release the 
energy by respiration and then lose it as heat.
Common mistake
If asked to describe the role of a saprotroph, it is incorrect to simply 
say that it is an organism that feeds on dead organic matter, because 
detritivores (which are not saprotrophs) ingest dead matter. You must make 
it clear that saprotrophs feed on dead organic matter by external digestion.
Diversity of nutrition in archaea
Microbes occur in enormous numbers. They occur everywhere in the biosphere, including some of 
Earth’s most hostile environments. These latter micro-organisms are the extremophiles and are in 
the domain archaea. There are many more species of micro-organism than there are other forms of 
life. However, micro-organisms fall into just one of four groups (Table B4.2.1).
 
■Table B4.2.1 The range of micro-organisms
Archaea – the 
extremophiles
Bacteria – the true 
bacteria
Unicellular 
protoctista – 
protozoa and some 
algae
Unicellular fungi 
Prokaryotic/ 
eukaryotic
prokaryotes
prokaryotes
eukaryotes 
eukaryotes
Domain
archaea
eubacteria
eukarya
eukarya
The archaea include a variety of photosynthetic, chemosynthetic and heterotrophic organisms:
l	 Some archaea use sunlight as a source of energy; however, oxygen-generating photosynthesis 
does not occur. Instead, archaea such as halobacteria use light-activated ion pumps to generate 
ion gradients by pumping ions out of the cell across the plasma membrane. The potential energy 
in these electrochemical gradients is then transferred to ATP by ATP synthase. 
l	 Some organisms are autotrophic but do not use sunlight to produce glucose. They use energy 
generated from chemical reactions. Because these archaea can make their own glucose, they are 
autotrophic (‘self-feeders’) and, because they do this by utilizing the energy from chemical 
reactions, they are known as chemoautotrophs. Some archaeans live at great depths in the sea, 
where there is no light for photosynthesis; they are hydrogen-dependent, using molecular 
hydrogen as an energy source rather than sunlight. 
Chemosynthetic archaea are found in the stomachs and intestines of some mammals. Methane-
producing archaea, or methanogens, release energy for ATP synthesis by producing methane gas. 
They use energy from the electrons found in hydrogen gas to produce methane and other organic 
compounds. Methanogens can also be found at the bottom of the ocean, where they can create huge 
methane bubbles beneath the ocean floor. It is not correct to say, therefore, that all energy in food 
comes from the Sun – some of it is generated by chemoautotrophs. 
5	 Define the term 
saprotroph.
Link
The classification 
of living things 
in domains was 
introduced in Chapter 
A3.2, page 137.
Link
Ion pumps are 
discussed in Chapter 
B2.1, page 230.
	
◆Chemosynthesis: 
inorganic molecules 
are oxidized to release 
energy; this energy 
is used to synthesize 
glucose. 
	
◆Chemoautotrophs: 
organisms that are 
chemosynthetic, i.e. use 
energy from chemical 
reactions involving the 
oxidation of inorganic 
compounds to make 
glucose.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
369
Top tip!
Both chemosynthesis and photosynthesis are processes where energy is used to synthesize 
glucose. The way that this energy is obtained varies in each process: photosynthesis (e.g. in plants) 
uses energy from sunlight to excite electrons, which then leads to the production of glucose; 
chemosynthesis (e.g. in some extremophile bacteria) uses oxidative chemical reactions involving the 
oxidation of inorganic compounds to make glucose.
Heterotrophic archaeans include marine species that feed on the lignin from woody plants washed 
out to sea. Lignin is a complex molecule found in the cell walls of vascular plants, serving to protect 
plants from pathogens as well as strengthening the cell wall. It is naturally resistant to degradation 
from many types of microbes. Archaea, by digesting the lignin, help to recycle plant remains, thereby 
contributing to the carbon cycle.
Relationship between dentition and diet 
Humans are part of the family Hominidae, one of the two families of the ape superfamily 
Hominoidea, the other being the Hylobatidae (gibbons – see page 361). Hominidae includes the 
great apes: the orangutans (genus Pongo), the gorillas (genus Gorilla), the chimpanzees and bonobos 
(genus Pan), and humans (genus Homo). The evolutionary tree of the Hominidae is shown in 
Figure B4.2.4. 
Nomascus concolor
gibbon
orangutan
gorilla
bonobo
chimpanzee
Hylobates lar
Hylobates agilis
Hylobates moloch
Pongo pygmacus
Gorilla gorilla
Pan paniscus
Pan troglodytes
Australopithecus africanus
Paranthropos robustus
Homo sapiens
Homo erectus
 
■Figure B4.2.4 The evolutionary tree of the Hominidae
Species within the Hominidae have a variety of different diets. Gorillas are mainly herbivores, feeding 
on large amounts of vegetation each day. Their skull and jaws are adapted for this plant-based diet. 
Large masseter muscles connect the skull with the jaw, enabling the animal to grind plant material 
between its teeth (masseter muscles create a side-to-side motion of the jaw). Temporal muscles pull 
up the jaw – this allows the animals to bite food. The temporal area is the part of the skull where 
these muscles attach: in gorillas (and in the other great apes) these areas are much larger than in 
humans. Gorillas also have a sagittal crest (a ridge of bone running along the centre-line of the top 
of the skull), to allow attachment for the large temporal muscle. This corresponds to the need to bite 
fibrous plant material forcibly. 
Chimpanzees are primarily frugivores (feed on fruit) and only eat vegetation if other forms of food are 
limiting. Occasionally, chimpanzees eat meat (e.g. from monkeys they have killed), so can have an 
omnivorous diet. As a result, they have less-developed masseter and temporal muscles than gorillas.  


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
370
There are several different types of teeth: incisors, canines, premolars and molars. Incisors are used 
for slicing food, canines for tearing, and premolars and molars for grinding food. In terms of 
dentition, gorillas have more developed canine and incisors than humans (Figure B4.2.5), similar to 
chimpanzees, and larger premolars and molars for grinding the tough vegetation. 
 
■Figure B4.2.5 Comparing the dentition of gorillas and humans
Humans evolved from a common ancestor with chimpanzees some 4 million years ago. One branch 
of evolution led to modern humans (see Figure B4.2.4). A side branch of evolution led to another 
group called the australopithecines, which are believed eventually to have gone extinct. One of the 
species from that group, Paranthropus robustus, had a skull that resembled that of a gorilla including 
a sagittal crest, due to the diet of tough vegetation that sustained them. The species name ‘robustus’ 
refers to the robust skull that they display, i.e. large teeth and strongly built jaws; in contrast, 
humans have a ‘gracile’ skull – a lighter, more slender structure. P. robustus had megadont (meaning 
‘large teeth’) cheek teeth, with thick enamel to cope with the tough vegetation. Large molars and 
premolars helped in the powerful chewing motion. 
Top tip!
Make sure you 
understand the 
relationship between 
dentition (teeth) and 
the diet of omnivorous 
and herbivorous 
representative 
members of the family 
Hominidae.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
371
Seven million years ago, human ancestors’ jaws and teeth were similar to those of modern 
chimpanzees. The incisors (the four front teeth on the top and the bottom of the skull and jaw) were 
relatively large, and the upper incisors were broad and projected outward. The canines were very long 
and pointed, and much larger in males than in females. Larger canines in apes have been linked with 
more fighting between males for access to females. Developed incisors and canines also allow food to 
be grasped and bitten. In humans, incisors are relatively small, narrow and vertical; canines are short 
(almost level with the other teeth) and relatively blunt. Molars (back teeth) in humans are small, and 
‘wisdom teeth’ may be partially hidden or impacted due to the shortening of the jaw. Premolars and 
molars are relatively flat with low, rounded cusps (bumps) on the grinding surface. Evolution led to a 
larger cranial capacity in humans with increased brain size, along with smaller teeth and more 
V-shaped jaws (reflecting changes in dietary requirements, with less emphasis on tough vegetation 
and a more omnivorous diet).
Homo floresiensis was a very small hominid, measuring just over a metre tall and having a very small 
brain. It is thought that it was a descendant of Homo erectus (an ancestor of modern humans) that 
underwent island dwarfism (a process where isolated species that lack predators and have limited 
resources evolve to become smaller). They coexisted with modern humans but are thought to have 
become extinct around 12 000 years ago. Remains of a skull of Homo floresiensis were found in Liang 
Bua cave, Flores, Indonesia, in 2003. Tooth wear from the skull suggests that their diet was tough 
and fibrous (i.e. plant based), requiring powerful chewing action (mastication). 
Examine models (if you have access to them) or digital collections of skulls to infer diet from the 
anatomical features of members of the Hominidae family. Start with Homo sapiens (humans), Homo 
floresiensis and Paranthropus robustus. Look at the examples above and work through the ATL activity 
to practise doing this.
	ATL B4.2A 
Use the following digital collections to examine models of Homo sapiens (humans), Homo floresiensis 
and Paranthropus robustus. While looking at the collections, think about these questions:
1	 What is the advantage of having digital models of these species?
2	 What are the limitations of the digital models?
Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History:  
https://humanorigins.si.edu/evidence/human-fossils
Smithsonian’s 3D Digitization website: https://3d.si.edu/collections/hominin-fossils
Homo floresiensis cranium:  
https://3d.si.edu/object/3d/homo-floresiensis-cranium:425a517b-8308-4ac9-8f3b-08f74e4ff9e5
Paranthropus robustus cranium:  
https://3d.si.edu/object/3d/paranthropus-robustus-cranium:8bc77140-b75c-4f96-9899-bf275b5d43dd
Paranthropus robustus jaw:  
https://3d.si.edu/object/3d/paranthropus-robustus-mandible:54907853-f218-466b-ab54-41a8aaaa59ea
Homo sapiens cranium (Cro-Magnon 1):  
https://3d.si.edu/object/3d/homo-sapiens-cranium:09d681b2-5ae9-44a8-b444-8e31bb40305e
	ATL B4.2B 
The following site has digital models of non-human animals (both vertebrate and invertebrate):
University of Michigan Online Repository of Fossils: http://umorf.ummp.lsa.umich.edu/wp
Examine several herbivores and several carnivores. How does the shape of the skull and jaw relate 
to their mode of feeding? How do these relate to what you know about the hominid skulls you 
have learnt about?
Top tip!
Current evidence 
indicates a plant-
based diet dominated 
in Homo floresiensis, 
but there is also 
some evidence of 
meat eating. The 
species had large 
premolars and a robust 
mandible, similar to 
the australopithecines, 
although they also had 
reduced molar size and 
a cranium similar to 
those of later species 
of Homo, suggesting 
a reduction in the 
frequency of forceful 
biting behaviours.
Link
Look at Figure 
A3.1.5 in Chapter 
A3.1, page 105, 
for a photograph 
of skulls from the 
genus Homo.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
372
Nature of science: Theories
It is not possible to observe extinct hominid forms today, so we must use modern-day examples 
and extrapolate from these to form theories about how and what extinct species ate. In this way, 
deductions can be made from theories. Observation of living mammals led to theories relating 
dentition to herbivorous or carnivorous diets. Tooth shape, tooth enamel wear-and-tear, and the 
shape of skull and jaws are all evidence for the animal’s diet. These theories allowed the diet of 
extinct organisms to be deduced. Scientific knowledge must be supported by evidence and so new 
evidence can amend/change theories.
Adaptations of herbivores for 
feeding on plants and of plants 
for resisting herbivory
 
■Adaptations of herbivores
Aphids have modified piercing mouth parts called stylets (Figure 
B4.2.6). These secrete the enzyme pectinase. Pectin, a polysaccharide 
that sticks the cell walls of plants together, is digested by pectinase, so 
the stylet can slide between cell walls into the plant’s phloem vessels 
and access the sucrose contained there (page 324).
Other insects eat plant leaves by using chewing mouthparts to bite, 
remove and masticate sections of leaf. Groups of insects that have 
chewing mouthparts include the grasshoppers, locusts, cockroaches, 
most wasps, beetles and termites. Caterpillars (the larval form of moths 
and butterflies) also have chewing mouthparts.
Some animals have adaptations for detoxifying plant toxins. For 
example, the proboscis monkey (Nasalis larvatus, Figure B4.2.7) that 
lives in the forests of northern Borneo, Malaysia, has bacteria in its 
extended intestines that help it to neutralize toxins from certain leaves, 
as well as to digest the cellulose cell walls. 
 
■Plant adaptations to resist herbivory
Plants have ways of resisting herbivory. For example, cacti have spines 
to stop predators accessing their stores of water (page 360). Stinging 
nettles (Urtica dioica) deter herbivores by having long, thin, hollow hairs 
over most of the stem and the underside of the leaves (Figure B4.2.8). 
Nettle stings contain methanoic (formic) acid and histamine, which 
cause a painful stinging and burning sensation. 
Other plants produce toxic secondary compounds in seeds and 
leaves. Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) contains the toxins 
atropine and scopolamine in its leaves, stems, berries and roots, which 
cause paralysis in the involuntary muscles of the body (including 
the heart) by competitively blocking the binding of acetylcholine (a 
neurotransmitter, see page 382) to receptors in the nervous system.  
 
■Figure B4.2.6 SEM image of a black aphid feeding 
on leaf sap by inserting its stylet into the plant
 
■Figure B4.2.7 Proboscis monkey 
(Nasalis larvatus) feeding on leaves
 
■Figure B4.2.8 Stinging hairs on the stem 
of a stinging nettle (Urtica dioica) 
	
◆Herbivory: feeding on 
plants.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
373
 
■Figure B4.2.9 Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), 
which contains toxins in its leaves, stems, berries and roots
Oleander (Nerium oleander) (see page 344) contains toxic 
cardiac glycosides (oleandrin and nerine), which when eaten 
can cause diarrhoea, vomiting, an erratic pulse, seizures, 
coma and eventually death. Many plants, such as the roots of 
cassava (Manihot esculenta), produce precursors of hydrogen 
cyanide. When an animal eats the plant, the precursors are 
converted into cyanide, which kills the animal by blocking 
the respiratory metabolic pathway. Humans eat cassava in 
many parts of the world (it is native to South America but is 
also grown and eaten in Nigeria, Thailand and Indonesia), 
but before it is consumed it needs to be detoxified by being 
cut into small pieces, soaked and then boiled in water, before 
further preparation takes place. 
Adaptations of predators and prey 
Top tip!
Make sure you can suggest or identify examples of chemical, physical and behavioural adaptations 
in predators or prey.
 
■Physical adaptations
A physical adaptation involves a structural modification to the body. There are many different 
physical adaptations, some of which are outlined below.
Eye positions
Predators have eyes on the front of their head to enable better depth perception, meaning they use 
binocular vision to estimate the distance to prey organisms (Figure B4.2.10a). Prey, in contrast, tend 
to have eyes on the side of their head so they can have a good view of their surroundings and detect 
the approach of predators from both sides, front and back (Figure B4.2.10b).

 
■Figure B4.2.10 a) A barn owl (Tyto alba) in flight – notice that its eyes are at the front 
of its head; b) a red deer (Cervus elaphus) – by having eyes on the side of the head, 
these prey animals have a larger field of vision to see approaching predators
Specialized sense organs
Predators also have at least one sense organ that is very efficient at detecting prey. For example, 
predatory snakes (such as rattlesnakes) use their tongue to pick up chemicals emitted from prey and 
a specialized organ in the mouth (the Jacobson’s organ) to detect these chemicals. Birds of prey (such 
as the peregrine falcon) have very acute vision, while nocturnal bats (such as pipistrelle bats) use 
echolocation to locate prey, using their large, sensitive ears to detect sound.
Concept: Form
Predators have 
adaptations 
for finding, 
catching and 
killing prey. Prey 
have adaptations 
for resisting 
predation.
	
◆Predation: a 
biological interaction 
where one organism, 
the predator, kills and 
eats another organism, 
its prey.
	
◆Predator: an organism 
that catches and kills 
other animals to eat.
	
◆Prey: an organism 
hunted and eaten by a 
predator.
a
b


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
374
Speed
Fast speed is an advantage for both predators and prey as it enables predators to catch their prey or 
for prey to escape their predators. Animals can be very fast on land, for example the cheetah, see 
page 326, or through the air, such as birds of prey diving at great speed. The peregrine falcon is the 
fastest diving bird in the world and has been recorded travelling at more than 380 km h−1, reaching 
its prey before the prey can respond (Figure B4.2.11). 
Mechanical defences
Hard shells on tortoises and turtles, or the spines of a hedgehog (a small mammal found throughout 
parts of Europe, Asia and Africa), physically prevent the predator from being able to eat the prey or 
causing pain to the predator (Figure B4.2.12). This discourages predation. 
Camouflage
Some species evolve camouflage as an adaptation: the organism evolves to resemble its background. 
This means that it is much less visible to predators. Chameleons have some of the best-known 
camouflage of any animal. They are lizards in the family Chamaeleonidae and are found in Africa, 
Madagascar, southern Europe and southern Asia. Fischer’s chameleon, for example, is found in 
Tanzania (Figure B4.2.13).
 
■Figure B4.2.12 A European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus)
 
■Figure B4.2.13 Fischer’s chameleon (Kinyongia fischeri): 
a species of chameleon that is endemic to Tanzania
Mimicry
Coral snakes are one of the most poisonous snakes on Earth (Figure B4.2.14a). They have the second-
strongest venom of any snake (the black mamba has the deadliest venom). Their black, red and white 
striped colouration is a warning to predators that they are venomous. Other, non-venomous snakes, 
such as king snakes (Figure B4.2.14b), mimic the colour, size and shape of coral snakes. Predators are 
tricked into thinking that that king snakes are poisonous and so avoid them. King snakes do not have 
to invest in making poison but have all the advantages of coral snakes in avoiding predation.
 
■Figure B4.2.14 An example of mimicry: a) coral snake (Micrurus altirostris), b) California mountain king snake (Lampropeltis zonata) 
a
b
 
■Figure B4.2.11 
A peregrine falcon (Falco 
peregrinus) in flight


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
375
	ATL B4.2C 
Research other examples of mimicry – what behavioural and physical adaptations do these 
animals demonstrate? What are the advantages for the mimics in copying the appearance or 
behaviour of another animal, for example the king snake copying the coral snake?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
6	 Outline the 
role of physical 
adaptations in 
helping predator 
and prey animals 
survive.
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Drawing annotated diagrams from observation
Select an animal or plant that shows physical adaptations to its environment. Draw 
the organism and then label its adaptations. Add annotations that explain how these 
adaptations help the organism to survive.
 
■Chemical adaptations
Many animals contain chemicals that are harmful to predators. These chemicals are 
synthesized and stored by the animal.
Toxicity
Warning colours are used to tell predators that the prey species may be toxic and 
not good to eat. For example, the caterpillar of the cinnabar moth has distinctive 
black and yellow stripes: this combination of colours is often used in the animal 
kingdom to indicate that an animal is poisonous. This caterpillar absorbs toxins 
from the ragwort on which it feeds (Figure B4.2.15). Predators that eat the 
caterpillar will experience an unpleasant taste and the presence of toxic chemicals, 
so they learn not to eat them. This type of defensive mechanism is called 
aposematic colouration.
Poison dart frogs live in the rainforests of Central and South America. The frog’s 
skin secretes a poison that can paralyze and kill predators. Poison dart frogs may 
get their toxicity from the insects they eat, such as ants and termites. They have 
bright colouration (Figure B4.2.16), which is a warning to potential predators of 
their toxicity. 
Chemical defences
Other species use chemicals for defence. Bombardier beetles (Brachinus sp.), 
Figure B4.2.17 eject a hot, noxious chemical spray from the tip of their abdomen. The 
spray is produced by a reaction between two chemicals, hydroquinone and hydrogen 
peroxide, which are stored in two chambers in the beetle’s abdomen. 
The skunk is a well-known animal that has chemical defences. These creatures spray 
a pungent liquid containing volatile sulfurous chemicals when threatened. The liquid 
sticks to the fur and skin of predators and deters them from approaching skunks in 
the future. 
Top tip!
Behavioural, chemical and physical adaptations often interact and reinforce each 
other. Before spraying a predator, a skunk will face away from the threat and 
arch its back, raise its tail and stomp its feet while making a hissing noise. Their 
colouration – bold white and black stripes – is a warning to potential predators.
 
■Figure B4.2.15 Caterpillars of the cinnabar 
moth (Tyria jacobaeae) on the yellow 
flowers of ragwort (Jacobaea vulgaris)
 
■Figure B4.2.16 The red striped poison 
dart frog (Ranitomeya reticulata)
 
■Figure B4.2.17 A bombardier 
beetle (Brachinus alternans)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
376
 
■Behavioural adaptations
As well as physical and chemical adaptations, predators and prey can behave 
in ways that increase their chance of survival. 
Not all predators rely on speed to catch their prey. Stealth predators, such 
as the Sumatran pit viper (Figure B4.2.18), wait for their prey to get close 
enough before they strike – to do this they must remain still until the 
prey is within reach. These animals are often camouflaged so they can 
remain undetected. 
Many animals roll into a ball when threatened by a predator, such as 
woodlice and millipedes. This is an example of a behavioural adaptation as 
well as a physical adaptation (Figure B4.2.19). 
Top tip!
Not all adaptations fit neatly into one category. They often overlap or 
influence each other. For example, a ‘rolling into a ball’ behavioural 
adaptation only works if the prey has a tough exoskeleton to protect itself.
Top tip!
Not all predators are animals: some plants are carnivorous and hunt insects 
(e.g. the Venus fly trap (Dionaea muscipula), page 327) and pitcher plants 
(e.g. Nepenthes species, page 361).
 
■Figure B4.2.19 A pill millipede 
rolled up into a defensive ball
 
■Figure B4.2.18 A Sumatran pit viper 
(Trimeresurus sumatranus) – a stealth predator
Adaptations of plants for harvesting light
In all ecosystems there is competition for often limited resources. The large number of species in 
tropical rainforests (page 360) means that competition in this biome is especially severe. 
Plant species are adapted in many ways to give them an advantage in the competition to survive. 
One of the main limiting factors in forest ecosystems is light, and plants use different strategies to 
reach light sources.
The forest can be divided into different layers, or strata. Emergent trees are the tallest trees that 
reach over the canopy, then the canopy trees form a layer of vegetation high above the forest floor. 
Several metres below the canopy is the understory of smaller plants and, at the bottom, the ground-
layer plants grow. 
Canopy trees have a competitive advantage over smaller plants as they have first access to sunlight 
and can acquire all frequencies of light. This maximizes photosynthesis and enables them to grow to 
a large size. The understory has less access to light, while the ground layer only receives around 1% 
of the light available to the canopy layer.
Lianas are woody vines: they have leaves and flowers in the canopy and roots on the ground, but 
instead of having a strong trunk they use the support of trees to reach the sunlight. They begin life 
on the forest floor and send shoots upwards towards the sunlight, and depend on the support of 
other plants for their growth and survival.
Epiphytes are plants that grow on the branches of trees. For example, the bird’s nest fern (South 
East Asia) and bromeliads (South America, see Figure B4.2.20) are both found high above the forest 
floor. Seeds of these plants are deposited by birds or mammals who rest on the branches of the tree. 
Link
Competition and 
its definition are 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C4.1, 
page 557.
Concept: Form
Plants in forests 
have a range of 
different forms to 
enable them to 
harvest light, to 
avoid competition.
7	 Describe the chemical and behavioural 
adaptations of predators for finding, 
catching and killing prey, and of prey 
animals for resisting predation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
377
Epiphyte species have the advantages of canopy trees but with none of the expense of having to 
grow long stems to reach this height – epiphytes use the support of trees to find their position at the 
highest levels in the forest. They have access to strong sunlight and warmth – both of which enable 
them to maximize growth. Epiphytes form microhabitats for many species of animals: they trap 
water, which enables aquatic animals, such as frogs, to live in an otherwise hostile environment.
Some epiphytes send roots down to the forest floor, where they can draw up nutrients and 
water. Some of these epiphytes form a thick network of stems and roots around the host tree, 
eventually killing the host. These are known as strangler epiphytes and include the strangler fig 
(Figure B4.2.21). By killing the host, the strangler epiphyte has greater access to resources and does 
not have to share these with the host.
 
■Figure B4.2.20 A bromeliad 
in the rainforest canopy
 
■Figure B4.2.21 Strangler fig (Ficus 
species) in the rainforest, Cape Tribulation 
National Park, Queensland, Australia
Shade-tolerant shrubs and herbs growing on the forest floor only have access to a small proportion of 
the light available in the canopy. Canopy plants filter out some frequencies of light (red and blue), 
leaving a more limited range of light wavelengths at the forest floor (e.g. green light). This means that 
shrubs and herbs on the forest floor contain different photosynthetic pigments from canopy plants, 
giving them a different colour (for example, red leaves rather than the mostly green leaves of the 
canopy). Another adaptation to these low light levels is that understory plants have often evolved 
much larger leaves. There are few flowering plants in the understorey – the lack of light makes 
flowers difficult to see by pollinators. The plants that do flower often produce very brightly coloured 
flowers so they can be seen easily in such surroundings (Figure B4.2.22). They are also strongly 
scented so they can attract pollinators with their smell.
Fundamental and realized niches
Early work by ecologists Joseph Grinnell and Charles Elton defined niche as simply the ‘job’ 
carried out by a particular species in the environment. This concept of niche allows for ‘vacant’ or 
empty niches: roles in an ecosystem that are not yet, but could be, filled. In the 1950s, zoologist 
G. Evelyn Hutchinson put a different perspective on the concept of niche by including the 
interactions between organism and environment. In the Hutchinson concept of niche, where ‘niche’ 
is a property of an organism, there can be no ‘empty niches’ because the definition of niche is 
species-centred, defined by the interaction of the species and its abiotic and biotic environment.
8	 Explain how 
plants at different 
levels (strata) in a 
forest are adapted 
for harvesting light.
 
■Figure B4.2.22 Spiral 
ginger flower (Costus 
pulverulentus), a shade-
tolerant shrub, in the 
rainforest of Costa Rica


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme B: Form and function – Ecosystems
378
Hutchinson realized that there was a difference between the area that a species could, in theory, 
occupy and one that it actually occupied. The abiotic environment forms physical limitations for the 
species, and the distribution of a species is affected by its range of tolerance to a variety of different 
environmental factors (as discussed on page 349). In reality, however, factors affecting how a species 
disperses itself, and how it interacts with other species, restrict the actual niche. Species live within 
communities and participate in complex food webs based on feeding and other interactions (see 
page 581), and so it is not sufficient to define a species’ niche simply by its range of tolerance to different 
abiotic variables. Abiotic factors, such as climate, are dominant across all geographical scales, whereas 
biotic factors, such as competition, predation and mutualism, tend to be dominant at smaller scales. 
From these ideas the concepts of fundamental niche and realized niche 
were developed.
In summary, the fundamental niche is the potential location of a species 
along an environmental gradient, and the realized niche is its actual 
location along gradients, determined by interactions between abiotic and 
biotic factors. The fundamental niche can, therefore, be simply defined as 
where an organism could live, and the realized niche as where an organism 
does live (Figure B4.2.23). 
9	 Distinguish between fundamental and realized niches.
Competitive exclusion and the 
uniqueness of ecological niches
 
■Competitive exclusion
When resources are limiting, populations will compete to survive. Competition can be either within 
a species (intraspecific competition) or between different species (interspecific competition). 
Interspecific competition exists when the niches of different species overlap (Figure B4.2.24). No two 
species can occupy the same niche, so the degree to which niches overlap determines the degree of 
interspecific competition. 
species A
species B
body size
proportion of individuals
species C
If two species share the same resource at the same place and the same time, then the dominant 
species will outcompete the other. The inferior competitor will either die out or move away to avoid 
the competition. This is competitive exclusion. 
The competitive exclusion principle was first suggested by a Russian biologist GF Gause in 1934, based 
on his experiments of culturing different species of Paramecium in the laboratory (Figure B4.2.25).
	
◆Fundamental niche: 
the potential extent 
of a species based on 
adaptations and tolerance 
limits.
	
◆Realized niche: the 
actual extent of a species 
when in competition with 
other species.
environmental variable 1
(e.g. temperature)
environmental variable 2
(e.g. salinity)
fundamental niche
realized niche
 
■Figure B4.2.23 The fundamental and realized niche
 
■Figure B4.2.24 The 
niches of species A and 
species B, based on 
body size, overlap with 
each other to a greater 
extent than with species 
C; strong interspecific 
competition will exist 
between species A and 
B, but not with species C


=== PAGE BREAK ===

B4.2   Ecological niches
379
time in days
10
8
6
4
2
200
0
50
100
150
0
16
14
12
time in days
10
8
6
4
2
200
0
50
100
150
0
16
14
12
gullet (’cytopharynx’)
food vacuoles of
bacteria formed here
waste disposed of
products of digestion
absorbed into cytoplasm
food vacuoles have
digestive enzymes
added, first in an acid
phase, then in an
alkaline phase
direction of movement
a feeding current is generated
by cilia in the oral groove
species cultured together
P. caudatum was
competitively excluded
species cultured separately
P. caudatum
a relatively large,
slow-growing species
P. aurelia
a smaller,
fast-growing species
numbers of Paramecium per
0.5 cm3 of culture solution
numbers of Paramecium per
0.5 cm3 of culture solution
An experiment carried
out by GF Gause in
1934 using species of
Paramecium, a large
protozoan common
in fresh water. It feeds
on plankton, the food
source used in these
experiments.
 
■Figure B4.2.25 Population growth curves for two species of Paramecium. If two 
species with very similar resource needs (that is, similar niches) are grown separately, 
both can survive and flourish (top graph); if the two species are grown in a mixed 
culture, the superior competitor – in this case P. aurelia – will eliminate the other
Competitive exclusion could be the pressure that causes closely related species, living together in the 
same habitat, to have evolved clearly defined but separate niches. This would occur over an extended 
period of time. For example, the competitive exclusion principle would account for the difference in 
niches between the cormorant and the shag that we noted earlier on page 364.
Link
A test for interspecific 
competition is 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C4.1, 
page 569.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the 
relative advantages 
of specificity and 
versatility?
2	 For each form of 
nutrition, what are 
the unique inputs, 
processes and 
outputs?
10	Define the term 
competitive 
exclusion.
