Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
380
C1.1
Enzymes and metabolism
•	 In what ways do enzymes interact with other molecules?
•	 What are the interdependent components of metabolism?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C1.1.1 	 Enzymes as catalysts
	 C1.1.2 	 Role of enzymes in metabolism
	 C1.1.3 	 Anabolic and catabolic reactions 
	 C1.1.4 	 Enzymes as globular proteins with an active site for catalysis 
	 C1.1.5 	 Interactions between substrate and active site to allow induced-fit binding
	 C1.1.6 	 Role of molecular motion and substrate–active site collisions in enzyme catalysis
	 C1.1.7 	 Relationships between the structure of the active site, enzyme–substrate 
specificity and denaturation
	 C1.1.8 	 Effects of temperature, pH and substrate concentration on the rate of 
enzyme activity
	 C1.1.9 	 Measurements in enzyme-catalysed reactions
	 C1.1.10 	Effect of enzymes on activation energy
	 C1.1.11 	Intracellular and extracellular enzyme-catalysed reactions (HL only)
	 C1.1.12 	Generation of heat energy by the reactions of metabolism (HL only)
	 C1.1.13 	Cyclical and linear pathways in metabolism (HL only)
	 C1.1.14 	Allosteric sites and non-competitive inhibition (HL only)
	 C1.1.15 	Competitive inhibition as a consequence of an inhibitor binding reversibly to an 
active site (HL only)
	 C1.1.16 	Regulation of metabolic pathways by feedback inhibition (HL only)
	 C1.1.17	 Mechanism-based inhibition as a consequence of chemical changes to the active 
site caused by the irreversible binding of an inhibitor (HL only)
Enzymes as catalysts
Many chemical reactions do not occur spontaneously, or they may happen very slowly 
(Figure C1.1.1). In a laboratory or in an industrial process, chemical reactions may be made 
to occur by applying high temperatures, high pressures, extremes of pH, by maintaining high 
concentrations of the reacting molecules, or by using inorganic catalysts. If these drastic conditions 
were not applied, very little of the chemical product would be formed. On the other hand, in cells 
and organisms, many chemical reactions occur simultaneously, at extremely low concentrations, at 
normal temperatures and under the very mild, almost neutral, aqueous conditions we find in cells.
It is the presence of enzymes in cells and organisms that enables these reactions to occur at 
relatively high rates, in an orderly manner, yielding products that the organism requires, when they 
are needed. Sometimes, reactions happen even though the reacting molecules are present in very low 
concentrations. Enzymes are biological catalysts made of protein. They are truly remarkable 
molecules. In general, catalysts:
l	 are effective in small amounts
l	 remain unchanged at the end of the reaction.
	
◆Enzyme: mainly 
proteins (some are RNA) 
that function as biological 
catalysts.
	
◆Catalyst: a substance 
that speeds up the rate 
of a chemical reaction. 
Catalysts are effective in 
small amounts and remain 
unchanged at the end of 
the reaction.
Concept: 
Interaction and 
interdependence
Systems are based 
on interactions, 
interdependence 
and integration of 
components. Systems 
result in the emergence 
of new properties at 
each level of biological 
organization.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
381
Common mistake
It is incorrect to use the term ‘amount’ when discussing variables in practical procedures. 
Use more precise terms available, such as ‘concentration’ or ‘volume’.
Figure C1.1.1 shows the benefit of increasing rates of reaction in cells. Many enzymes are always 
present in cells and organisms, but some enzymes are produced only under particular conditions, 
at certain stages or when a particular substrate molecule is present. By making some enzymes and 
not others, cells can control what chemical reactions happen in the cytoplasm.
Role of enzymes in metabolism
There are many thousands of chemical reactions taking place within cells and organisms. 
Metabolism is the name we give to these chemical reactions. These reactions can only occur in 
the presence of specific enzymes. If an enzyme is not present, the reaction it catalyses only occurs 
at a very slow rate. The molecules involved are collectively called metabolites. Many metabolites 
are made in organisms, but others are imported from the environment, such as from food 
substances, water and the gases carbon dioxide and oxygen. 
water
sucrose
water
sucrose
water
sucrose
water
sucrose
water
sucrose
water
sucrose
water
sucrose
Random collision possibilities:
when sucrose and water molecules collide at the wrong angle
when sucrose and water collide at the wrong speed
for the reaction to occur, sucrose and water must collide in
just the right orientation – glucose and fructose are formed
These events are what 
happens at most random 
collisions.
Under normal conditions 
this happens so very 
infrequently it is an 
insigniﬁcant event.
In the presence of one molecule of the enzyme sucrase (invertase),
approximately 3.0 × 104 molecules of sucrose are hydrolysed each
minute! 
glucose
fructose
 
■Figure C1.1.1 Can a reaction occur without an enzyme?
Concept: 
Interaction 
Interaction: The 
effect or effects that 
two or more systems, 
bodies, substances or 
organisms have on 
one another, so that 
the overall result is not 
simply the sum of the 
separate effects.
Concept: 
Interdependence 
Interdependence: 
Biological systems are 
not self-sufficient. 
Molecules, cells, 
organisms and 
ecosystems interact 
with each other 
within and across 
levels of organization. 
The greater the level 
of interaction, the 
greater the degree of 
interdependence.
Concept: 
Interaction
Metabolism depends 
on the interaction 
of many different 
enzymes. Enzymes 
for specific reactions 
are located within 
compartments 
(organelles) within 
eukaryotic cells, for 
example the enzymes 
of oxidative respiration 
are found within 
mitochondria.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
382
 
■What is the meaning of enzyme specificity?
Many different enzymes are required by living organisms, and control over metabolism can be exerted 
through these enzymes. Each enzyme is specific to one substrate, so that metabolic processes can be 
closely controlled. Enzymes are usually classified according to the type of reaction they catalyse and 
they can be named according to their substrates (i.e. the reactants that enzymes act on).
Metabolism consists of chains (linear sequences) and cycles of enzyme-catalysed reactions, such as 
we see in respiration (page 405), photosynthesis (page 425), protein synthesis (page 615), and in 
very many other pathways. All these reactions may be classified as one of just two types, according 
to whether they involve the build-up or breakdown of organic molecules. These are called anabolism 
and catabolism, respectively (see below).
Anabolic and catabolic reactions
In anabolic reactions, larger molecules are built up from smaller molecules. Anabolism involves the 
formation of macromolecules from monomers by condensation reactions (page 186).
Examples of anabolism include:
l	 the synthesis of proteins from amino acids (Chapter B1.2, page 207)
l	 the synthesis of polysaccharides from simple sugars, e.g. glycogen formation (Chapter B1.1, 
page 187)
l	 photosynthesis (Chapter C1.3, page 425).
Catabolism is the breakdown of larger molecules into simple molecules. The catabolic reactions 
involved include hydrolysis reactions (page 186).
Examples of catabolism include:
l	 hydrolysis of macromolecules into monomers in digestion (Chapter B1.1, page 187)
l	 oxidation of substrates in respiration (Chapter C1.2, page 412).
Overall: metabolism = anabolism + catabolism
green plants
CO2 + H2O + light energy
photosynthesis
+ ions
catabolism
energy-releasing reactions
(exergonic reactions)
sugars,
amino acids,
fatty acids
anabolism
energy-requiring reactions
(endergonic reactions)
complex molecules,
e.g. polysaccharides,
proteins, lipids,
hormones, pigments
digestion
animals
complex food molecules taken in,
rich in chemical energy
ATP = energy currency
linking endergonic and
exergonic reactions
ATP
ADP + Pi
ATP
ADP + Pi
simpler compounds,
e.g. inorganic molecules
CO2 + H2O, ions
 
■Figure C1.1.2 Metabolism = anabolism + catabolism
1	 Define the term 
metabolism.
	
◆Anabolism: the 
synthesis of complex 
molecules from simpler 
molecules including 
the formation of 
macromolecules 
from monomers by 
condensation reactions.
	
◆Catabolism: the 
breakdown of complex 
molecules into simpler 
molecules including 
the hydrolysis of 
macromolecules into 
monomers.
2	 Define the 
following terms 
and give one 
example of each:
a	 anabolic 
reaction
b	 catabolic 
reaction. 
3	 Distinguish 
between anabolism, 
catabolism and 
metabolism.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
383
Enzymes as globular proteins with 
an active site for catalysis
Enzymes are typically large, globular protein molecules, where the tertiary structure has given the 
molecule a generally rounded shape. In a reaction catalysed by an enzyme, the starting substance is 
called the substrate, and what it is converted to is the product. 
An enzyme works by binding to the substrate molecule(s) at a specially formed pocket in the 
enzyme. This binding point is called the active site. Here, as the enzyme and substrate form an 
enzyme–substrate (ES) complex, the substrate is raised to a high-energy transition state. This 
complex has the briefest of existences before the substrate molecule is formed into another molecule 
or broken down into others by the catalytic properties of the active site. Then the product(s) are 
released, together with the unchanged enzyme (Figure C1.1.4). The enzyme is available for reuse.
active site (here
the substrate
molecule is held
and reaction occurs)
– the lock
substrate molecule
– the key
enzyme–substrate
complex
enzyme (large
protein molecule)
product
molecules
substrate
molecule now at
transition state
enzyme + substrate          E–S complex           product + enzyme available for reuse
(substrate raised to
transition state)
E
+
S
E–S
Pr
+
E
The sequence of steps to an enzyme-catalysed reaction:
 
■Figure C1.1.4 The enzyme–substrate complex and the active site
Common mistake
When describing enzyme-catalysed reactions, crucial details are sometimes missed out. Do not 
forget to mention the active site, substrate and ES complex.
The active site is a pocket or crevice in the protein where the substrate molecule binds and catalysis 
occurs (see Figure C1.1.4). The active site of an enzyme may only be made from a few amino acids, 
but the interactions between the amino acids within the overall three-dimensional structure of the 
enzyme ensure that the active site has the necessary properties for catalysis. These properties include 
binding to the substrate molecule, holding on to it while the chemical reaction takes place and 
lowering the energy of the transition state (see below).
Most substrate molecules are quite small compared to the enzyme. Even when the substrate 
molecules are very large, for example certain macromolecules such as polysaccharides, only one 
bond in the substrate is in contact with the enzyme active site. The active site takes up a relatively 
small part of the total volume of the enzyme.
synthesis of complex
molecules used in growth
and development, and in
metabolic processes,
e.g. proteins,
polysaccharides,
lipids, hormones, growth
factors, haemoglobin,
chlorophyll
nutrients
sugars,
amino acids,
fatty acids,
i.e. smaller
organic
molecules
release of simple
substances,
e.g. small inorganic
molecules, CO2, H2O,
mineral ions
anabolism:
energy-requiring
reactions, i.e.
endergonic
reactions
catabolism
energy-releasing
reactions,
i.e. exergonic
reactions
 
■Figure C1.1.3 
Summary of anabolic 
and catabolic reactions
Link
Globular proteins are 
discussed in Chapter 
B1.2, page 221.
	
◆Substrate: the 
starting substance 
(reactant) in a reaction 
catalysed by an enzyme. 
It is the molecule that the 
enzyme reacts with.
	
◆Product: what the 
substrate is converted to 
in a reaction catalysed by 
an enzyme.
	
◆Active site: region 
of an enzyme molecule 
where the substrate 
molecule binds and 
catalysis occurs.
	
◆Enzyme–substrate 
(ES) complex: a 
temporary structure 
formed when a substrate 
binds to the active site of 
an enzyme. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
384
Induced-fit binding
Enzymes are highly specific in their action, which makes them different from most inorganic 
catalysts. Enzymes are specific because of the way they bind with their substrate at the active site, 
which is a pocket or crevice in the protein (Figure C1.1.5). At the active site, the arrangement of a few 
amino acid molecules in the protein (enzyme) matches certain groupings on the substrate molecule, 
enabling the enzyme–substrate complex to form. As it forms, a slight change of shape is induced in 
the enzyme and substrate molecules (the induced-fit model, Figure C1.1.6). It is this change in 
shape that is important in raising the substrate molecule to the transition state in which it can react.
polypeptide of 49 amino acid residues,
making up a simple enzyme
active site (pocket/crevice
in the protein molecule)
the ‘induced-ﬁt’ process plays a
part in bringing about the chemical
changes, which are the enzyme-
catalysed reaction
some amino acid molecules
The substrate molecule
binds (temporarily)
with the enzyme by
inducing a change in
shape of the enzyme
molecule. In the 
interaction, the shape 
of the substrate also 
changes.
The amino acids in a
protein have different
roles.
match certain groupings on the
substrate molecule, enabling the
enzyme–substrate complex to form,
e.g. residues 3–4–5 and 24–25–26
other amino acid molecules are ‘reactive’,
i.e. catalytic residues that induce the
breaking of bonds, and the formation
of product(s), e.g. 20 and 41
other amino acid residues interact to form the
three-dimensional structure of the enzyme
3
4
5
20
24
25
26
41
substrate
substrate
Speciﬁcity:  
•  Some amino acid molecules
    allow a particular substrate
    molecule to ‘ﬁt’.
•  Some amino acid molecules
    bring about particular
    chemical changes.
 
■Figure C1.1.5 Enzyme specificity and the active site
Meanwhile, other amino acids of the active site bring about the specific catalytic reaction 
mechanism, perhaps breaking particular bonds in the substrate molecule and forming others. 
Different enzymes have different arrangements of amino acids in their active sites. Consequently, 
each enzyme catalyses either a single chemical reaction or a group of closely related reactions.
4	 Explain why the 
shape of enzymes 
is important in 
enzyme action.
	
◆Induced-fit: the 
binding of the substrate 
to the enzyme causes 
a change in the shape 
of the enzyme and the 
substrate, resulting in the 
proper alignment of the 
catalytic groups on its 
surface, which enables 
catalysis to take place.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
385
glucose
+ ATP 
hexokinase
(computer-generated
molecular model)
Computer-generated image of the induced-ﬁt hypothesis in action:
The enzyme hexokinase catalyses the reaction:
glucose + ATP 
glucose-6-phosphate + ADP 
two polypeptide
chains make up
the enzyme
slight change in 
the shape of 
the active site 
and substrate 
as the substrate 
molecule ﬁts 
into active site, 
and reaction 
takes place
active 
site
 
■Figure C1.1.6 Induced-fit catalysis by hexokinase
In the original model of enzyme-substrate interactions, the lock-and-key model, the active site 
of the enzyme is the complementary shape of the substrate and so fits to the substrate precisely. 
The enzyme acts as a ‘lock’ and the substrate is the ‘key’ – the shape of the key matches the lock 
and one key opens one lock. In the induced-fit model, the active site of the enzyme undergoes a 
conformational change to improve binding with the substrate – it has been compared to a hand 
entering a glove, where both hand and glove change shape to ensure optimal fit (the ‘hand-in-glove’ 
model). Most enzymes seem to follow the latter model.
	ATL C1.1A 
Access this website: www.abpischools.org.uk/topics/enzymes-16/enzymes-biological-catalysts-
that-control-the-reactions-of-life
Explore the structure and function of enzymes using the information and animations provided. 
Produce a poster explaining the role that enzymes play in organisms. When were enzymes first 
used by humans? How are they used today in industrial processes?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
5	 Define the term 
induced-fit binding.
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Physical modelling
This video discusses the lock-and-key and induced-fit models:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=E-_r3omrnxw
Make and present models (using modelling clay, for example), emphasizing the 
differences between the lock-and-key and induced-fit (‘hand-in-glove’) models.  
You could also consider the limitations of representing the enzyme as the ‘lock’ and the 
substrate as the ‘key’.
Discuss in pairs, or a small group, why making a physical model is useful.
Top tip!
Both substrate and 
enzyme change shape 
when binding occurs.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
386
The role of molecular motion and 
collisions in enzyme catalysis
Movement is needed for a substrate molecule and an active site to come together. The greater the 
kinetic energy of enzyme and substrate, the greater the chance of collisions between molecules and 
the formation of enzyme–substrate complexes.
Sometimes large substrate molecules are immobilized, and sometimes enzymes can be immobilized 
by being embedded in membranes. Immobilized enzymes are often more stable than free enzymes 
in a solution and may provide a better environment for enzyme activity.
Enzymes immobilized on (or in) a membrane (EIM) is a widely used method in food processing, 
pharmaceuticals and wastewater treatment. The EIM system facilitates recycling of the enzymes and 
also, in many cases, enhanced enzyme properties (e.g. stability and viability). The membrane is a 
porous structure on to which specific enzymes are attached.
 
■Immobilization of enzymes for industrial use
Enzymes may be used in industrial processes as cell-free preparations that are added to a reaction 
mixture, or they may be immobilized and the reactants passed over them. Enzyme immobilization 
involves the attachment of enzymes to insoluble materials which then provide support. For example, 
the enzyme may be entrapped between inert fibres or it may be covalently bonded to a matrix 
(Figure C1.1.7). In both cases, the enzyme molecules are prevented from being leached (washed) away. 
b adsorption
a entrapment
d cross-linking
e affinity
c covalent bonding
enzyme
active
site
membrane
surface
 
■Figure C1.1.7 Enzyme immobilization techniques
The advantages of using an immobilized enzyme in industrial processes are:
l	 it permits reuse of the enzyme preparation
l	 the product is enzyme free
l	 the enzyme may be much more stable and long lasting, due to protection by the inert matrix.
TOK
People who are unable to produce lactase fail to digest lactose, a carbohydrate found in milk. 
As a result, bacteria in the large intestine feed on the lactose, producing fatty acids and methane, 
causing diarrhoea and flatulence. Such people are said to be lactose intolerant and need to 
consume lactose-free milk. 
The knowledge and technology required to make lactose-free milk is common in more economically 
developed countries. However, sharing that knowledge would undoubtedly benefit people from all 
over the world. If a company from a more economically developed country has this knowledge, are 
they ethically obligated to share this knowledge? One famous example is Volvo sharing its knowledge 
of the three-point seat-belt system without charge, while Moderna recently promised not to enforce 
its COVID-19 vaccine patents in certain countries. In both cases, the knowledge was important enough 
distribute freely. 
If you are going to explore this question in a TOK context, remember that TOK is about knowledge, 
not (as this case might lead you into discussing) about solutions for distribution of a product. 
Make sure your analysis is about the knowledge required to develop these products.
	
◆Immobilized 
enzyme: an enzyme 
attached to an inert, 
insoluble material, 
enabling recovery, reuse 
and improved enzyme 
stability.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
387
Relationships between the structure 
of the active site, enzyme–substrate 
specificity and denaturation
Denaturation occurs when the weak intramolecular interactions within the globular protein, formed 
between different amino acid residues, break. This changes the three-dimensional shape of the 
active site. Peptide bonds are not hydrolyzed and broken during denaturation. In denaturation, the 
structure of the active site is changed, so the enzyme and substrate can no longer bind together 
(Figure C1.1.8).
Link
Denaturing of proteins and the effects of pH and temperature on protein structure are 
detailed in Chapter B1.2, page 210. Peptide bonds are covered in B1.2, page 207.
Effects of temperature, pH and substrate 
concentration on rate of enzyme activity
Nature of science: Patterns and trends
You need to be able to describe the relationship between variables as shown in graphs. You should 
recognize that generalized sketches of relationships are examples of models in biology. Models in 
the form of sketch graphs can be evaluated using results from enzyme experiments. Enzyme 
experiments include investigating the effects of temperature, pH and substrate concentration on the 
rate of enzyme activity. In each case, the shape of the graph will be specific to the reaction 
being investigated.
Top tip!
Accurate, quantitative 
measurements in 
enzyme experiments 
require replicates to 
ensure reliability.
 
■Effect of temperature
Examine the investigation of the effects of temperature on the hydrolysis of starch by the enzyme amylase, 
shown in Figure C1.1.9. 
When starch is hydrolyzed by the enzyme amylase, the product is maltose, a disaccharide 
(page 186). Starch gives a blue–black colour when mixed with iodine solution (iodine in potassium 
iodide solution), but maltose gives a yellow or brown colour (depending on concentration of iodine), 
indicating no reaction has occurred. The first step in this experiment is to bring samples of the 
enzyme and the substrate (the starch solution) to the temperature of the water bath before being 
mixed – a step called pre-incubation.
The progress of the hydrolysis reaction is followed by taking samples of a drop of the mixture on 
the end of the glass rod at half-minute intervals. These are tested with iodine solution on a white 
tile. Initially, a strong blue–black colour is seen, confirming the presence of starch. Later, as maltose 
accumulates, an orange colour predominates. The endpoint of the reaction is indicated when all 
the starch colour has disappeared from the test spot. Using fresh reaction mixture each time, the 
investigation is repeated at a series of different temperatures, say at 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 ºC. 
The time taken for complete hydrolysis at each temperature is recorded and the rate of hydrolysis in 
unit time is plotted on a graph.
temperature
or pH changes
away from
optimum
complementary
shapes
denatured enzyme:
shape of substrate
no longer
complementary to
shape of active site
substrate
active site
 
■Figure C1.1.8 The 
effect of pH and 
temperature on enzymes


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
388
30
60
45
15
glass rod
water bath
at selected
temperature
mixed
the sequence of colour
changes observed is:
blue–black = starch
yellow–brown = all carbohydrate is
                            present as
                            maltose (a disaccharide)
The experiment is repeated at a range of
temperatures, such as at 10°C,20°C,30°C,40°C,
50°C and 60°C.
A control tube of 5 cm3 of starch solution + 5 cm3
of distilled water (in place of the enzyme) should be
included and tested for the presence/absence of
starch at each temperature.
5 cm3 pre-incubated 
amylase solution
5 cm3 pre-incubated 
starch solution
The glass rod is rinsed
before it is returned to the
reaction mixture to remove
any traces of iodine solution.
iodine solution
white spotting tile
stop
clock
water
 
■Figure C1.1.9 The effects of temperature on hydrolysis of starch by amylase
Interpreting graphs: the effect of temperature on the rate of enzyme activity
A characteristic curve is the result (Figure C1.1.10) – although the optimum temperature varies with 
the reaction and with different enzymes.
l	 As temperature is increased, molecules have increased kinetic energy and reactions between 
them go faster.
l	 The molecules are moving more rapidly and are more likely to collide and react. Q10, the 
temperature coefficient, is a measure of the rate of change of a reaction when the temperature is 
increased by 10 °C (see Tools box, page 394). Many enzymes have a Q10 of about 2, which means 
that the rate of the reaction approximately doubles for every 10 °C rise in temperature.
l	 However, in enzyme-catalysed reactions the effect of temperature is more complex, as proteins 
are denatured by heat. The rate of denaturation increases at temperatures higher than the 
optimum. So, as the temperature rises, the amount of active enzyme progressively decreases, and 
the rate is slowed. As a result of these two effects of temperature on enzyme-catalysed reactions, 
there is an apparent optimum temperature for an enzyme. Humans have enzymes with an 
optimum temperature at or about normal body temperature.
Common mistake
When explaining the increase in the reaction rate of an enzyme, it is insufficient to say ‘because 
there are more collisions with the enzyme’. A better answer is: ‘because there are more frequent 
collisions between the substrate and the active site’. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
389
10
20
denatured enzyme –
substrate molecules no
longer fit the active site
enzyme in
active state
temperature at which the
rate was measured/ºC
30
40
50
60
high rate
rate of enzyme-catalysed reaction
(amount of substrate used up or
amount of product formed per unit
time, e.g. per second) in arbitrary units
low rate
Other variables – such as the
concentration of the enzyme
and substrate solutions – were
kept constant. 
Up to about 40 ºC the rate increases –
a ten-degree rise in temperature is
accompanied by an approximate
doubling of the rate of reaction. 
Now the enzyme-catalysed 
reaction rate decreases,
owing to the denaturation
of the enzyme and
destruction of active sites.
active site
 
■Figure C1.1.10 Temperature and the rate of an enzyme-catalysed reaction
Not all enzymes have the same optimum temperature. For example, the bacteria in hot thermal springs 
have enzymes with optima between 80 ºC and 100 ºC or higher (see page 47), whereas seaweeds of 
northern seas and the plants of the tundra have enzymes with optimum temperatures closer to 0 °C. 
This feature of enzymes is often exploited in the commercial and industrial uses of enzymes.
6	 Figure C1.1.10 shows the effect of temperature on the rate of an enzyme-catalysed 
reaction. State the optimum temperature of the enzyme.
7	 In studies of the effect of temperature on enzyme-catalysed reactions, suggest why 
the enzyme and substrate solutions are pre-incubated to a particular temperature before 
they are mixed.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Processing uncertainties
Whenever a measurement is recorded, there will always 
be some doubt about the result that has been obtained. 
An uncertainty in a measurement is an interval that 
indicates a range within which we are confident that 
the true value lies. Scientific apparatus has a level of 
uncertainty. For example in Table C1.1.1, the thermometer 
has an uncertainty of ±0.1 °C, i.e. measurements may be 
+ or – 0.1 above or below the recorded measurement. ➜
Top tip!
When plotting data, 
ensure that the 
axes are correctly 
orientated, i.e. 
independent variable 
on the x-axis and the 
dependent variable on 
the y-axis. Ensure that 
the data points fill the 
area for the graph, and 
that an appropriate 
linear scale is chosen.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
390
Plotting linear graphs showing the relationship between two variables
The following results were obtained in an investigation 
of the effects of pre-incubation of starch and amylase 
solutions at different temperatures on the subsequent 
hydrolysis of the starch to maltose.
1	 Draw a graph of these results, including a curve of 
best fit, and analyse the trend shown.
2	 Suggest the shape of the graph if the reciprocal of 
time (1/t) was plotted on the y-axis. This represents 
the relative rate of reaction.
 
■Table C1.1.1 Time taken to hydrolyse starch to maltose at different temperatures
Temperature of solution/°C ± 0.1 °C
10.0
20.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45.0
50.0
55.0
60.0
Time taken to hydrolyse starch 
to maltose/s ± 0.1 s
100.0
58.0
30.0
21.0
15.0
11.0
19.0
46.0
100.0
	ATL C1.1B 
Read the following article: www.nature.com/news/1998/980917/full/news980917-7.html
Many organisms possess enzymes that work in extremes of temperature or pH. This Nature 
article discusses lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in Antarctic fish. Can you find an example where an 
enzyme works in extremes of pH?
8	 Describe 
the effect of 
temperature on 
enzyme-catalysed 
reactions.
9	 A buffer is a 
solution that is 
used to control the 
pH of a process 
occurring in an 
experimental 
aqueous medium. 
Suggest why such 
solutions are often 
used in enzyme 
experiments.
 
■Effect of pH
Change in pH can have a dramatic effect on the rate of an enzyme-catalysed reaction 
(Figure C1.1.11). Each enzyme has a limited range of pH at which it functions efficiently. This is 
often at or close to the neutrality point (pH 7.0). This effect of pH occurs because the structure of 
a protein (and, therefore, the shape of the active site) is maintained by various bonds and weaker 
intermolecular forces within the three-dimensional structure of the protein. A change in pH from 
the optimum value alters the bonding patterns, progressively changing the three-dimensional shape 
of the molecule. The active site may be quickly rendered inactive. However, unlike the effects of 
temperature changes, the effects of pH on the active site are normally reversible – provided, that is, 
the change in surrounding acidity or alkalinity is not too extreme. As the pH reverts to the optimum 
for the enzyme, the active site may reform.
Interpreting graphs on the effect of pH on the rate of enzyme activity
Rates of enzyme reaction can be calculated for an enzyme at different pH (Figure C1.1.11). In these 
graphs, the maximum values are of interest because they represent the optimum pH for the enzyme. 
Rates either side of these values are non-optimum.
Some of the digestive enzymes of the gut have different optimum pH values from most other 
enzymes. For example, those adapted to operate in the stomach, where there is a high concentration 
of acid during digestion, have an optimum pH that is close to pH 2.0 (Figure C1.1.11).
Tool 3: Mathematics
Interpolating graphs
'Interpolate' means to make assumptions about the graph in-between the data 
points that have been collected. For example, in the graph for trypsin (Figure C1.1.11), 
the plotted data do not include the optimum; this is predicted to lie between two 
recorded values between pH 7 and 8, with the interpolate line showing it to be at 
approximately pH 7.8.
10	Figure C1.1.11 
shows the effect 
of pH on the 
rate of reaction 
of two enzymes. 
Estimate the 
optimum pH 
for trypsin.
11	Sketch a graph 
showing the 
effect of pH on an 
enzyme that has 
an optimal pH of 7.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
391
lower pH
optimum pH for enzyme
higher pH
pH at which the
rate was measured
substrate molecules no
longer fit the active site
enzyme in
active state
substrate molecules no
longer fit the active site
pH
the optimum pH of different human enzymes
10
8
6
4
2
optimum pH
of pepsin
(active in
acidic
stomach)
optimum pH of
most enzymes
in human cells
optimum pH
of trypsin
(active in neutral/alkaline
duodenum and small intestine)
rate of enzyme-catalysed reaction
(amount of substrate used up
or amount of product formed
per unit time)
active site
structure of protein changes when a change of pH alters the ionic charge on
—COO– (acidic) and —NH3
+ (basic) groups in the peptide chain, so the shape of the active site is lost
rate of reaction
 
■Figure C1.1.11 Effect of pH on enzyme shape and activity
 
■Effect of substrate concentration
The effect of different concentrations of substrate on the rate of an enzyme-catalysed reaction can be 
shown using an enzyme called catalase. This enzyme catalyses the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide:
2H2O2 
 2H2O + O2
Catalase occurs very widely in living things; it functions as a protective mechanism for the delicate 
biochemical machinery of cells. This is because hydrogen peroxide is a common by-product of 
reactions of metabolism, but it is also a very toxic substance since it is a powerful oxidizing agent 
(see page 412). Catalase inactivates hydrogen peroxide as it forms before any damage can occur.
catalase


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
392
When measuring the rate of enzyme-catalysed reactions, we measure the amount of substrate that 
has disappeared from a reaction mixture or the amount of product that has accumulated in a unit of 
time. For example, in Figure C1.1.10 (page 389) it is the rate at which the substrate starch disappears 
from a reaction mixture that is measured.
Interpreting graphs on the effect of substrate concentration on the rate of 
enzyme activity
Working with catalase, it is convenient to measure the rate at which the product (oxygen) accumulates 
– the volume of oxygen that has accumulated at 30-second intervals is recorded (Figure C1.1.12).
Over time, the initial rate of reaction is not maintained, but falls off quite sharply. This is typical 
of enzyme actions studied outside their location in the cell. The fall-off can be due to a number of 
reasons, but most commonly it is because the concentration of the substrate in the reaction mixture 
has fallen. Consequently, it is the initial rate of reaction that is measured. This is the slope of the 
tangent to the curve in the initial stage of reaction.
30
60
45
15
30
25
20
15
10
5
volume of oxygen
produced/cm3
60
120
180
240
time/s
300
The initial rate of reaction, i.e. the volume of
oxygen produced per second (cm3s–1), can be calculated.
from the
graph
The rate of an enzyme reaction is greatest at the start, the initial rate.
The test tube is tipped up to mix the enzyme solution with the substrate.
delivery tube
catalase
solution
3% hydrogen
peroxide
solution
(10 volume)
oxygen produced, collected
by downward displacement
of water in an inverted
measuring cylinder
stop
clock
initial rate
instantaneous rate
recorded
results
plotted
Time/s
(± 1 s)
Total volume of
oxygen gas
collected/cm3
(± 0.5 cm3) 
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
12.0
16.0
19.0
22.0
23.0
24.0
25.0
25.5
26.0
6.0
 
■Figure C1.1.12 Measuring the rate of reaction using catalase
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
In designing the experiment illustrated in Figure C1.1.12, identify and justify the choice of 
the dependent variable, the independent variable and the controlled variables.
Tool 1: 
Experimental 
techniques
Accurately 
measuring 
volume
Figure C1.1.12 
shows the volume 
of gas being 
measured using an 
inverted measuring 
cylinder. This is 
only applicable for 
gases that have low 
solubility in water 
(e.g. oxygen) and 
not applicable for 
gases that have 
high solubility in 
water. Volume of 
gas can also be 
measured using 
a gas syringe (see 
Figure C1.3.11, 
page 435).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
393
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Evaluating
Look at the experiment illustrated in Figure C1.1.12. Identify and discuss one likely 
potential source of error when the experiment is carried out. Explain how such an error 
is detected and what relevant improvements could be made to this experiment.
To investigate the effects of substrate concentration on the rate of an enzyme-catalysed reaction, 
the experiment shown in Figure C1.1.12 is repeated at different concentrations of substrate, and 
the initial rate of reaction is plotted in each case. Other variables, such as temperature and enzyme 
concentration, are kept constant.
When the initial rates of reaction are plotted against the substrate concentration, the curve shows two 
phases. At lower concentrations, the rate increases in direct proportion to the substrate concentration. 
At higher substrate concentrations, the rate of reaction becomes constant and shows no increase.
Now we can see that the enzyme catalase works by forming a short-lived enzyme–substrate complex. 
At a low concentration of substrate, all molecules can find an active site without delay. Effectively, 
there is an excess of enzyme present. The rate of reaction is set by how much substrate is present 
– as more substrate is made available, the rate of reaction increases. Increased concentrations of 
substrate mean that there are more collisions between substrate and the enzyme, with a higher 
likelihood of the substrate binding with the active site of the enzyme and enzyme–substrate 
complexes forming, causing the reaction to take place.
However, at higher substrate concentrations there comes a point when there is more substrate than 
enzyme. In effect, substrate molecules must ‘queue up’ for access to an active site. Adding more 
substrate increases the number of molecules awaiting contact with an enzyme molecule, so there is 
now no increase in the rate of reaction (Figure C1.1.13).
few substrate molecules,
many active sites free:
increase in substrate 
concentration
will increase the rate
more substrate
molecules, all active
sites engaged in
catalysis: approaching
maximum rate of
reaction
excess of substrate molecules,
all active sites engaged in catalysis:
increase in substrate concentration
will not change the rate
initial rate of reaction
substrate concentration
high
high
low
low
12	When there is an 
excess of substrate 
present in an 
enzyme-catalysed 
reaction, explain 
the effect on the 
rate of reaction 
of increasing the 
concentration of:
a	 the substrate
b	 the enzyme.
 
■Figure C1.1.13 The 
effect of substrate 
concentration


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
394
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data 
Access this site: https://exchange.iseesystems.com/public/jondarkow/lactase-with-
variable-sample-sizes/index.html#page1
This is a simulation of experiments with the enzyme lactase, which hydrolyzes lactose to 
glucose and galactose. Click on the ‘Simulate’ tab to access the simulation. Keep the pH 
and temperature at the default settings of pH 7 and 25 ºC. Leave the lactase enzyme 
concentration at 5 mM (millimoles) for this and all your experiments. Set the sample 
size to 10. 
Run the simulation at initial lactose (the substrate) concentrations of 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 
100 and 120 mM. After each simulation at each substrate concentration, click on the 
‘mean of samples’ tab. Here you will find a graph of the average amount of glucose 
produced over time. On the graph at the 10-minute mark, determine the value of 
the product (glucose) concentration (mM). Since the simulation begins with a glucose 
concentration of zero, the value of glucose concentration at 10 minutes divided by 
10 is also the slope or initial velocity of the reaction (mM min–1). Carry out further 
experiments to determine the effect of pH and temperature on lactase rate.
Measurements in enzyme-catalysed reactions
Tool 3: Mathematics 
Calculating rates of change from graphical and tabulated data
The rate of reaction is measured by dividing a value of the dependent variable by 
time. In Figure C1.1.12, the initial rate is taken by extrapolating a straight line from 
the first section of the curve. The rate of reaction is calculated by dividing a value 
of the dependent variable (volume of oxygen produced) taken from along this line by 
the corresponding time, as shown by the dashed lines in the graph. Relative rates of 
reaction can be calculated using the reciprocal of time (1/t).
For example, in the experiment on the effect of temperature on starch digestion by 
amylase (page 390), relative rates can be calculated:
Temperature of solution 
/ °C ± 0.1 °C
10.0
20.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45.0
50.0
55.0
60.0
Time taken to hydrolyse 
starch to maltose/s ± 
0.1 s
100.0
58.0
30.0
21.0
15.0
11.0
19.0
46.0
100.0
Relative rate of reaction 
(1/t) s−1
0.010
0.017
0.033
0.048
0.067
0.091
0.053
0.022
0.010
These data show the rate of reaction increasing from 10 to 45 °C, and then decreasing 
to the original rate at 60 °C.
13	Calculate the 
initial rate of 
reaction in 
Figure C1.1.12.
14	Explain the 
factors that 
affect the rate of 
enzyme-controlled 
reactions in cells.
15	List three factors 
that can affect the 
rate of enzyme 
reactions.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
395
Effect of enzymes on activation energy
We visualize an enzyme (E) as a large molecule that works by reacting with another compound or 
compounds, the substrate (S). Initially, a short-lived enzyme–substrate complex (ES) is formed at the 
active site. This complex exists at a local energy minimum and is quite stable. The transition state 
(TS) is the point where there is a maximum value of energy. The transition state exists at the  
top of the energy profile and is transient. Almost instantly, the product (P) is formed and the 
enzyme is released unchanged. The enzyme immediately takes part in another reaction. We 
represent this reaction as follows:
E + S → [ES] → ES ‡ → P + E
where ES ‡ is the transition state.
Energy is released when the ‘substrate’ becomes the ‘product’. However, to bring about the reaction, 
a small amount of energy is needed initially to break or weaken bonds in the substrate, to form the 
transition state. This energy input is called the activation energy (Figure C1.1.14). It is a small but 
significant energy barrier that must be overcome before the reaction can happen. Enzymes work by 
lowering the amount of energy required to activate the reacting molecules by providing a new, 
alternative reaction pathway.
Another model of enzyme catalysis includes a boulder (substrate) perched on a slope, prevented 
from rolling down by a small hump (representing activation energy). The boulder can be pushed over 
the hump, or the hump can be dug away to lower it (= lowering the activation energy), allowing the 
boulder to roll down and shatter at a lower level (giving products).
Energy is needed to break the bonds within the substrate. When bonds are made from the products 
of an enzyme-catalysed reaction, there is an energy yield. You should be able to interpret graphs 
showing this effect, for example Figure C1.1.14.
Note: virtually all enzyme-catalysed reactions still have activation energy barriers, they are just 
smaller. The enzyme lowers the ‘hump’ of activation energy, it does not remove it.
products
(at lower
energy level)
triggering the fall,
either by pushing
‘boulder on hillside’ model of activation energy
or by lowering
the hump
the hump (the
enzyme way)
activation energy
free energy change
energy
reactant
products
without a catalyst, this
amount of energy needs
to be put in to start the
reaction
effect of catalyst
transition state
Example:
sucrase
sucrose  +  water ⎯⎯⎯→glucose  +  fructose
 
■Figure C1.1.14 Activation energy
	
◆Activation energy: 
energy required by a 
substrate molecule before 
it can undergo a chemical 
change.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
396
	ATL C1.1C 
Find out more about activation energy here:  
https://ed.ted.com/lessons/activation-energy-kickstarting-chemical-reactions-vance-kite
Produce a cartoon or poster, using ideas from this book and from the animation, to summarize 
the role of enzymes in reducing activation energy in metabolic reactions. Producing your own 
visual summaries of important biological concepts can help you understand and remember them.
16	Sketch a graph 
showing the effect 
of an enzyme 
on the activation 
energy of a 
metabolic reaction.
17	Define the term 
activation energy.
Top tip!
Molecules collide more frequently at higher temperatures; however, the main reason why the 
reaction speeds up is that more molecules have enough energy to get over the activation energy.
Intracellular and extracellular 
enzyme-catalysed reactions
Some enzymes are exported from cells, such as the digestive enzymes. Enzymes like these are put 
into vesicles, secreted by endocytosis and work externally. They are called extracellular enzymes. 
Chemical digestion in the gut is an example of an extracellular reaction.
However, most enzymes remain within cells and work there. These are the intracellular enzymes. 
Many are found inside organelles and in the membranes of organelles, in the fluid medium around 
the organelles and in the plasma membrane. Many are also in the cytoplasm (e.g. glycolysis, 
page 414). Two of the main metabolic processes in respiration are glycolysis and the Krebs cycle. 
These are intracellular enzyme-catalysed reactions. 
18	Distinguish between intracellular and extracellular enzymes.
Generation of heat energy by the 
reactions of metabolism
When glucose is oxidized to carbon dioxide and water in aerobic cell respiration, energy is 
transferred from the store of chemical potential energy to heat energy (i.e. the kinetic energy of 
molecular motion). This energy is no longer in store but is on the move; it is active energy. Only 
part of the stored energy in a molecule is available. This is known as free energy and can be used 
to do work. Reactions that release free energy are known as exergonic reactions (Figure C1.1.15). 
The oxidation of glucose is an example of an exergonic reaction.
Heat generation is inevitable in metabolic reactions. Exergonic reactions involve the release of heat 
because metabolic reactions are not 100% efficient in energy transfer. Mammals, birds and some 
other animals depend on this heat production for maintenance of constant body temperature and 
are said to be endotherms (page 766) or ‘warm-blooded’. Other animals cannot control their cell 
metabolism in this way and are described as ectotherms (‘cold-blooded’).
On the other hand, reactions in which energy is absorbed, and there is more energy in the system at 
the end of the reaction than at the beginning of it, are called endergonic reactions. The synthesis of 
a protein from amino acids is an example of an endergonic reaction.
	
◆Extracellular 
enzyme: an enzyme 
secreted by a cell that 
functions outside the cell.
	
◆Intracellular 
enzyme: an enzyme that 
functions within the cell 
in which it was produced.
Link
Respiration and the 
Krebs cycle are covered 
in detail in Chapter 
C1.2, page 405.
Link
Energy transfer is 
covered in Chapter 
C4.2, page 578. 
The maintenance 
of constant body 
temperature is covered 
in Chapter D3.3, 
page 766.
HL ONLY


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
397
+ free energy given out,
as work done,
or heat, or both
A+B
AB
an uphill
reaction
energy put in
CD
+ free energy input
a downhill
reaction
energy given off
C+D
In an exergonic reaction the products have less stored
energy than the reactants.
In an endergonic reaction energy has to be put in,
because the products have more stored energy than the
reactants.
 
■Figure C1.1.15 Exergonic and endergonic reactions
The many endergonic reactions that occur in metabolism are made possible by being coupled to 
exergonic reactions. Coupling occurs through adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (the energy currency 
molecule in biology). Molecules of ATP work in metabolism by acting as common intermediates, 
linking energy-absorbing and energy-yielding reactions. Metabolic processes mostly involve ATP, 
directly or indirectly.
Cyclical and linear pathways in metabolism
Metabolism consists of series of reactions in which the product of one reaction is an intermediate of 
the next, and so on. Many pathways consist of linear metabolic pathways (that is straight chains) 
of reactions, while others are cyclical metabolic pathways (Figure C1.1.16). We shall see examples 
of both types of metabolic pathway within the reactions of respiration, a catabolic process 
(page 405), and photosynthesis, an anabolic process (page 425).  
h
g
f
e
a
b
c1
c2
d
x
A
B
C
D
E
I
G
F
H
X
Y
cyclical
metabolic
pathway
branched
metabolic
pathway
metabolite A
(substrate of
enzyme a)
linear
metabolic
pathway
enzymes c1 and c2
compete for
metabolite C
How much of metabolite C is converted to X or to D 
depends on the relative amounts of enzymes c1 and c2, 
and how readily each forms its enzyme–substrate complex.
 
■Figure C1.1.16 Some metabolic pathways and the roles of enzymes
Link
The definition and 
structure of ATP are 
detailed in Chapter 
B2.1, Figure B2.1.12, 
page 232.
	
◆Linear metabolic 
pathway: a series 
of enzyme-catalysed 
reactions that run in one 
direction, from reactant 
to product.
	
◆Cyclical metabolic 
pathway: a circular 
series of enzyme-
catalysed reactions where 
there is no end to the 
series; one reaction leads 
to the next and eventually 
back to the starting point.
	
◆Metabolic pathway: 
sequence of enzyme-
catalysed biochemical 
reactions in cells and 
tissues.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
398
In respiration, glycolysis is a linear metabolic pathway (page 414) and the Krebs cycle a cyclical one 
(page 418). Photosynthesis has two sets of reactions – the light-dependent reactions and the light-
independent reactions (page 439). The light-independent reactions are driven by the Calvin cycle 
(page 445) – another example of a cyclical pathway.
TOK
You will have noticed that the study of biology requires some understanding of chemistry. 
Chemical theory is used to explain the inner workings of biological phenomena. Do you think this 
means that chemistry is a body of knowledge that is somehow more foundational than biology? 
Can all the facts of biology be translated into facts about chemistry? 
You might also ask similar questions in relation to other areas of knowledge (AOKs): does physics 
describe the world better than chemistry? Can art describe facts about human experience in a 
preferable way to history or biology? 
Thinking about the scope of the AOKs is a helpful tool in TOK. The scope element of the TOK 
Knowledge Framework encourages you to think about the specific questions that one AOK will ask 
rather than another. Biology, for instance, might be more interested in identifying and explaining 
facts about whole organisms or systems, while chemistry focuses more on chemical and atomic 
interactions. That these different types of knowledge overlap and inform one another is crucial to 
understanding any one of them, but being able to explore them as distinct knowledge communities 
is a helpful TOK strategy.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
19	Compare and 
contrast cyclical 
and linear 
pathways in 
metabolism.
Enzyme inhibitors
The actions of enzymes may be inhibited by other molecules, some formed in the cell and others 
absorbed from the external environment. These substances are known as enzyme inhibitors since 
their effect is generally to lower the rate of reaction.
Top tip!
Studying the effects of inhibitors has helped our understanding of: 
l	 the chemistry of the active site of enzymes
l	 the natural regulation of metabolism and which pathways operate
l	 the ways certain commercial pesticides and drugs work, namely by inhibiting specific enzymes 
and preventing particular reactions.
For example, molecules that sufficiently resemble the substrate in shape may compete to occupy 
the active site. These are known as competitive inhibitors. The enzyme that catalyses the 
reaction between carbon dioxide and the acceptor molecule in photosynthesis is known as 
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (rubisco, page 445) and is competitively inhibited by oxygen in 
the chloroplasts.
Alternatively, an inhibitor may be unlike the substrate molecule, yet still combine with the enzyme. 
In these cases, the attachment occurs at some other part of the enzyme, probably quite close to the 
active site. Here, the inhibitor either partly blocks access to the active site by substrate molecules, or 
it causes the active site to change shape and so be unable to accept the substrate. These are called 
non-competitive inhibitors since they do not compete for the active site. Adding excess substrate 
does not overcome their inhibiting effects (Figure C1.1.17). 
	
◆Enzyme inhibitor: a 
substance that slows or 
blocks enzyme action.
	
◆Competitive 
inhibitor: a substance 
that binds to the active 
site of an enzyme, 
slowing or blocking 
enzyme action.
	
◆Non-competitive 
inhibitor: a substance 
that does not bind to the 
active site but to another 
part of the enzyme, 
slowing or blocking 
enzyme action.
Link
Rubisco is covered 
in more detail 
in Chapter C1.3, 
page 445.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
399
Examine the graph in Figure C1.1.17 carefully. 
You can see that when the initial rates of reaction of an enzyme are plotted against substrate 
concentration, the effects of competitive and non-competitive inhibitors are clearly different.
substrate
enzyme
two types of reversible
inhibition
competitive inhibitor
in place: substrate prevented
from binding
non-competitive inhibitor
in place: catalytic activity of
active site prevented
active site
change
in shape
of active
site
low
high
maximum rate
of enzyme-catalysed reaction
without any inhibitor
effect of a competitive
inhibitor:
substrate and inhibitor 
compete for active sites, so 
excess substrate overcomes 
inhibition
effect of a non-competitive
inhibitor:
inhibitor does not compete for
active sites, so excess substrate
will not overcome inhibition
initial rate of reaction
substrate concentration
When the initial rates of reaction of an enzyme are plotted against
substrate concentration, the effects of competitive and non-competitive
inhibitors are seen to be different.
 
■Figure C1.1.17 Competitive and non-competitive inhibitors
The difference between competitive and non-competitive inhibition is in the interactions between 
substrate and inhibitor and, therefore, in the effect of substrate concentration. In non-competitive 
inhibition, the inhibitor does not compete for active sites and so excess substrate will not overcome 
inhibition. In competitive inhibition, substrate and inhibitor compete for active sites and so excess 
substrate will overcome inhibition.
 
■Allosteric sites and non-competitive inhibition
Allosteric regulators are molecules that change the shape and activity of an enzyme by reversibly 
binding at a site on the enzyme, typically some distance from the active site. Binding of an allosteric 
activator temporarily stabilizes the enzyme shape as an active and effective catalyst. Binding of an 
allosteric inhibitor changes the enzyme shape into an inactive form. 
We can see allosteric regulation as a form of reversible non-competitive inhibition or activation 
of an enzyme. Subtle fluctuations in the concentrations of activators and inhibitors may fine-
tune the activity of a critical pathway as constantly changing conditions or requirements of cell 
metabolism demands.
Only specific substances known as effectors can bind to an allosteric site. Binding causes interactions 
within an enzyme that lead to conformational changes, which alter the active site enough to prevent 
catalysis. Binding is reversible.
An investigation of the initial rate of reaction of the enzyme catalase in the 
presence and absence of heavy metal ions (Cu2+)
The enzyme catalase catalyses the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide (see page 391 earlier in the chapter): 
2H2O2 
 2H2O + O2
	
◆Allosteric 
regulators: molecules 
that change the shape 
and activity of an enzyme 
by reversibly binding at a 
site on the enzyme.
catalase


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
400
The rate of an enzyme-catalysed reaction is the amount of substrate that has disappeared from a 
reaction mixture, or the amount of product that has accumulated, in a period of time. For example, 
with catalase it is convenient to measure the rate at which the product (oxygen) accumulates. In this 
experiment, an indication of the volume of oxygen that was released at half-minute intervals was 
recorded at each substrate concentration. 
When these ‘raw’ results for each concentration of hydrogen peroxide were plotted on a graph, it 
was found that, over time, the initial rate of reaction was not maintained; in fact, it decreased quite 
quickly. This is typical of enzyme actions studied outside their location in the cell. The reduction 
in rate can be due to a number of reasons, but most commonly it is because the concentration of 
the substrate in the reaction mixture has fallen. Consequently, it is the initial rate of reaction that is 
determined. This is the slope of the tangent to the curve in the initial stage of reaction. How this is 
calculated is shown in Figure C1.1.12 (page 392).
Look at this account of how an initial reaction rate is calculated now.
The apparatus used is illustrated in Figure C1.1.18 and the reaction mixtures in this experiment are 
tabulated below. Note that:
1	 A yeast suspension was used as the source of the enzyme. The number of bubbles released at 
half-minute intervals was counted and recorded for six minutes with each reaction mixture. 
(The initial rush of bubbles when the yeast was injected was discounted. The depth of the bubble 
nozzle was the same in each experiment.) 
2	 The concentration of a hydrogen peroxide solution is given as the volume of oxygen that can be 
released. For example, a 20-volume solution will, when completely decomposed, give 20 times its 
own volume of oxygen.
3	 A duplicate investigation was carried out in the presence of a dilute solution of copper(ii) 
(Cu2+ (aq)) ions. 
water bath
2 cm3 syringe to hold
yeast suspension
bung cut in half to allow
syringe needle to penetrate
right through
hydrogen 
peroxide 
solution to 
which yeast 
suspension 
has been 
added 
side-arm test tube
rubber delivery tube
boiling tube
glass tube 
made into a 
nozzle 1 mm 
in diameter
 
■Figure C1.1.18 Apparatus for monitoring the effects of 
substrate concentration on the action of catalase


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
401
The reaction mixtures used, and the results obtained, are shown in Tables C1.1.2 and C1.1.3. 
Examine them and then answer the questions.
 
■Table C1.1.2 Effect of substrate concentration on enzyme-catalysed reaction
Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6
volume distilled water (cm3)
4.0 
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
volume 20-vol H2O2 (cm3)
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
concentration of H2O2 (vol)
4.0 
6.0 
8.0
10.0 
12.0 
14.0 
volume yeast suspension (cm3)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
initial rate of reaction
(bubbles/min)
0.5
17.0
24.0
27.0
30.0
32.0
 
■Table C1.1.3 Effect of substrate concentration on enzyme‑catalysed 
reaction in presence of heavy metal ions
Experiment
1
2
3
4
5
6
volume distilled water (cm3)
3.9
3.4
2.9
2.4
1.9
1.4
volume 0.1 M copper(ii) (Cu2+)
solution (cm3)
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
volume 20-vol H2O2 (cm3)
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
concentration of H2O2 (vol)
4.0 
6.0 
8.0 
10.0 
12.0 
14.0 
volume yeast suspension (cm3)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
initial rate of reaction
(bubbles/min)
0.2
8.0
14.0
15.0
15.4
15.6
 
■Competitive inhibition
Competitive inhibition is a consequence of 
an inhibitor binding reversibly to an active 
site (see above).
Statins are an example of competitive 
inhibitors. They are competitive inhibitors 
of an enzyme crucial for the synthesis of 
cholesterol: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 
coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase 
(HMGR) (see Figure C1.1.19). Statins are 
similar in structure to the substrate of 
HMGR, HMG-CoA. Statins can therefore 
occupy a portion of the binding site of 
HMG-CoA, blocking access of this 
substrate to the active site of the enzyme 
(Figure C1.1.20).
Top tip!
You will not be expected to recall the 
names of individual chemicals in these 
reactions. They are used here to explain 
the mechanism of enzyme inhibition.
20	Construct a 
graph showing 
the initial rates of 
reaction of the 
enzyme catalase 
over the substrate 
concentration 
range of 4–14 vol 
hydrogen peroxide 
in the presence 
and absence of 
heavy metal ions. 
21	Explain to what 
extent these 
data support the 
hypothesis that 
copper(ii) ions are 
a non-competitive 
inhibitor of the 
enzyme that 
decomposes 
hydrogen peroxide. 
	
◆Statin: any of a class 
of drugs that lower the 
level of low-density 
lipoproteins in the blood 
by inhibiting the activity 
of an enzyme involved 
in the production of 
cholesterol in the liver. 
HO
acetyl-CoA
acetoacetyl-CoA
mevalonic acid
HMG-CoA
reductase
squalene
cholesterol
(C27H46O)
β-hydroxy-β-
methylglutaryl-CoA
 
■Figure C1.1.19 The 
metabolic pathway of 
cholesterol synthesis
statin
(competitive inhibitor)
HMG-CoA
(substrate)
X
HMG-CoA reductase
active site
OH
HO
CH3
CH3
O
O
HO
O
O–
C
H3C
HO
O
O
O–
C
S-CoA
C
OH
HO
CH3
CH3
O
O
HO
O
O–
C
 
■Figure C1.1.20 Statins compete with HMG‑CoA 
for the active site of HMG-CoA reductase 
(X indicates that site is blocked to substrate)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
402
Health consequences of the lipid content of diets
The lipid cholesterol is a component of the diet, particularly when animal fats are present. This lipid 
is a steroid (see Chapter B2.1, page 237). 
There are two forms of cholesterol carried in the blood:
l	 low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), complexes of thousands of cholesterol molecules bound to 
proteins in particles (‘bad cholesterol’)
l	 high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), or ‘good cholesterol’.
Excess blood cholesterol, present as LDLs, may cause atherosclerosis – the progressive degeneration 
of the artery walls (page 300). A direct consequence of this is an increased likelihood of the 
formation and circulation of blood clots.
Statins are taken to reduce LDLs in the blood and therefore reduce the risk of coronary heart disease 
and other effects of high levels of cholesterol in the blood.
	ATL C1.1D 
Many drugs are enzyme inhibitors, for example angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 
which are used to treat hypertension. Research this example or generate a list of other medicines 
that work as enzyme inhibitors, such as the antibacterial effects of penicillin or sulfonamide.
22	Distinguish 
between 
competitive and 
non-competitive 
enzyme inhibition.
 
■Regulation of metabolic pathways by feedback inhibition
Individual pathways in metabolism may be switched off by the final product acting as a reversible 
inhibitor of the enzyme that catalyses the first step in the pathway. 
In end-product inhibition, as the product molecules accumulate, the steps in their production are 
switched off (Figure C1.1.21). However, these product molecules may now become the substrate in 
subsequent metabolic reactions. If so, the accumulated product molecules will be removed and 
production of new product molecules will recommence.
inhibition of
enzyme a by
the end-product
molecule
enzyme a
substrate
molecule
intermediate products
of the metabolic pathway
end-product
A
a
B
C
D
E
F
enzyme b
b
c
d
e
This is an example of the regulation of a metabolic pathway by negative feedback.
 
■Figure C1.1.21 Regulation of a metabolic pathway by end-product inhibition
Common mistake
A common misconception is that a competitive inhibitor of an intermediate enzyme in a pathway 
would prevent any final product from being formed. This is unlikely because the substrate of the 
inhibited enzyme would still sometimes manage to bind to the active site and there would be some 
final product.
	
◆End-product 
inhibition: when the 
product of the last 
reaction in a metabolic 
pathway inhibits the 
enzyme that catalyses 
the first reaction of the 
pathway.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.1   Enzymes and metabolism
403
End-product inhibition of the pathway that converts threonine to isoleucine
Bacteria can synthesize isoleucine from threonine. Figure C1.1.22 shows the metabolic pathway for 
the synthesis of isoleucine.
l	 Isoleucine acts as a non-competitive inhibitor by binding to the allosteric site of the enzyme 
threonine deaminase.
l	 Threonine deaminase is an essential enzyme in the first stage of the metabolic pathway – its 
inhibition turns off isoleucine production. This regulates the production of isoleucine.
l	 Initially, when isoleucine concentration is still low, the metabolic pathway can proceed as non-
competitive inhibition is low.
l	 As isoleucine concentration increases, non-competitive inhibition takes place and the metabolic 
pathway is regulated.
l	 As isoleucine is used in the cell for protein synthesis, its concentration falls and the allosteric sites 
of threonine deaminase are no longer occupied, so the enzyme can once again act in the 
conversion of threonine to isoleucine.
threonine
enzyme 1 threonine deaminase
high levels of isoleucine
(allosteric inhibitor)
enzyme (threonine deaminase)
low levels of isoleucine
substrate
(threonine)
isoleucine inhibits threonine deaminase
CH3 C
OH
H
C H
NH2
COOH
intermediate A
enzyme 2
intermediate B
enzyme 3
intermediate C
enzyme 4
intermediate D
enzyme 5
isoleucine
CH2 C
H
CH3
CH3
C H
NH2
COOH
 
■Figure C1.1.22 Isoleucine inhibits threonine deaminase, acting as a non-competitive inhibitor
 
■Mechanism-based inhibition
A substrate analogue is a molecule that has a similar structure to the substrate, allowing it to bind 
covalently to the active site of the enzyme. When it binds to the active site, the substrate analogue 
can be modified by the enzyme to produce a reactive group, which reacts irreversibly to form a stable 
inhibitor–enzyme complex. This is known as mechanism-based inhibition. 
Penicillin was the first group of antibiotics developed to fight bacterial disease (see page 532). 
But what is the mechanism by which penicillin kills bacteria? 
The cell walls of bacteria are made from peptidoglycan (also known as murein), which is formed 
from polysaccharide chains linked by short peptides (Figure C1.1.23). The bacterial enzyme 
DD‑transpeptidase forms cross-links between these strands, strengthening the structure. Penicillin 
inhibits DD-transpeptidase. By inhibiting transpeptidase, the cell walls are not cross-linked, so they 
are weak. Without a strong cell wall, a bacterial cell is vulnerable to the movement of water into 
the cell by osmosis, which kills the bacteria by lysis (the increased pressure of water inside the cell 
causes the membrane to burst). 
Top tip!
Isoleucine is an 
essential amino acid: 
it cannot be made by 
the human body and 
so must be consumed 
from food.
	
◆Mechanism-based 
inhibition: process 
that occurs when 
unreactive molecules 
are transformed into 
an active form through 
catalytic reactions; these 
active forms inhibit the 
enzyme, typically through 
covalent modification 
of the active site. It is 
an irreversible form of 
enzyme inhibition.
Link
Antibiotics are 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C3.2, 
page 532.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
404
How does penicillin inhibit DD-transpeptidase?
The structure of penicillin resembles parts of the growing peptide chain of the peptidoglycan cell 
wall. Instead of binding to a peptide chain, the transpeptidase binds to penicillin; the structure of 
the penicillin is modified by the enzyme, forming an inactive enzyme–penicillin complex, which 
blocks the formation of further cross-linkages (Figure C1.1.23). The penicillin substrate is modified 
by its interaction with the transpeptidase, and an irreversible form of enzyme inhibition occurs. 
This is an example of mechanism-based inhibition.
polysaccharide chain
polysaccharide chain
inactivated
DD-transpeptidase
penicillin
peptide
active
DD-transpeptidase
 
■Figure C1.1.23 Penicillin blocks the formation of peptide cross-
links between polysaccharide chains of peptidoglycan
Bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin. Mutations in the bacterial genome can 
lead to changes in the active site of some transpeptidases, causing the penicillin to reduce or lose its 
affinity with the enzyme, promoting resistance to the antibiotic (Figure C1.1.24). When mutations 
occur in plasmid DNA, resistance can quickly spread through bacteria through the process of 
conjugation (see page 119). 
opened
active site
penicillin
transpeptidase
mutation
closed
active site
 
 
■Figure C1.1.24 Genetic mutations can result in structural changes in the 
active site of transpeptidases, leading to antibiotic resistance
	ATL C1.1E 
Many metabolic poisons are enzyme inhibitors. Research the example of α-amantin as an RNA 
polymerase inhibitor, or the use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors as insecticides or nerve gas. 
Concepts you will encounter will link to Chapters D1.2 and C2.1, respectively.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are examples of structure–function relationships in biological macromolecules?
2	 What biological processes depend on differences or changes in concentration? 
Link
Bacterial resistance 
to antibiotics is 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C3.2, 
page 534.
