C1.2   Cell respiration
405
C1.2
Cell respiration
•	 What are the roles of hydrogen and oxygen in the release of energy in cells?
•	 How is energy distributed and used inside cells?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C1.2.1 	 ATP as the molecule that distributes energy within cells
	 C1.2.2 	 Life processes within cells that ATP supplies with energy
	 C1.2.3 	 Energy transfers during interconversions between ATP and ADP
	 C1.2.4 	 Cell respiration as a system for producing ATP within the cell using energy 
released from carbon compounds
	 C1.2.5 	 Differences between anaerobic and aerobic cell respiration in humans
	 C1.2.6 	 Variables affecting the rate of cell respiration
	 C1.2.7 	 Role of NAD as a carrier of hydrogen and oxidation by removal of hydrogen 
during cell respiration (HL only)
	 C1.2.8 	 Conversion of glucose to pyruvate by stepwise reactions in glycolysis with a net 
yield of ATP and reduced NAD (HL only)
	 C1.2.9 	 Conversion of pyruvate to lactate as a means of regenerating NAD in anaerobic 
cell respiration (HL only)
	 C1.2.10 	Anaerobic cell respiration in yeast and its use in brewing and baking (HL only)
	 C1.2.11 	Oxidation and decarboxylation of pyruvate as a link reaction in aerobic cell 
respiration (HL only)
	 C1.2.12 	Oxidation and decarboxylation of acetyl groups in the Krebs cycle with a yield 
of ATP and reduced NAD (HL only)
	 C1.2.13 	Transfer of energy by reduced NAD to the electron transport chain in the 
mitochondrion (HL only)
	 C1.2.14 	Generation of a proton gradient by flow of electrons along the electron 
transport chain (HL only)
	 C1.2.15 	Chemiosmosis and the synthesis of ATP in the mitochondrion (HL only)
	 C1.2.16 	Role of oxygen as terminal electron acceptor in aerobic cell respiration (HL only)
	 C1.2.17	 Differences between lipids and carbohydrates as respiratory substrates (HL only)
ATP as the molecule that distributes 
energy within cells
 
■Cellular respiration: introduction
Living organisms require energy to build and repair body structures and to maintain all the activities 
of life, such as movement, reproduction, nutrition, excretion and sensitivity. Energy is also required 
for life processes within cells (see below). Energy is transferred in cells by the breakdown of 
nutrients, principally of carbohydrates such as glucose. The process by which energy is made 
available from nutrients in cells is called cell respiration. Cell respiration is the controlled release of 
energy from organic compounds in cells.
	
◆Cell respiration: 
the enzyme-controlled 
release of energy from 
organic compounds to 
produce ATP.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
406
Energy in respiration is transferred in small quantities; much of the energy is made available to the 
cells and may be temporarily trapped in the energy currency molecule adenosine triphosphate (ATP). 
However, some energy is still lost as heat in each step – we notice how warm we become with 
strenuous physical activity.
energy in molecules
time
energy change in cellular respiration
energy transferred
to ATP in many
small steps (ATP
then used
in muscular
contraction) 
CO2  + H2O  
glucose + oxygen
energy in molecules
time
energy change in burning
energy lost as
heat
CO2  + H2O  
glucose 
+ oxygen
 
■Figure C1.2.1 Combustion and respiration compared
 
■ATP – the universal energy currency
Energy that is made available within the cytoplasm is transferred from glucose to a molecule called 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP is referred to as energy currency because, like money, it can 
be used in different contexts, and it is constantly recycled. Respiration changes energy from one form 
of ‘currency’ (glucose) into a different currency (ATP). Glucose is relatively stable, whereas ATP 
breaks down, releasing the energy it stores when coupled to another reaction.
ATP is a nucleotide (page 15) with an unusual feature. It carries three phosphate groups linked 
together in a linear sequence (Figure C1.2.2). ATP may lose both of the outer phosphate groups, but 
usually only loses one at a time. ATP is a relatively small, soluble organic molecule. It occurs in cells 
at a concentration of 0.5–2.5 mg cm−3, which remains fairly constant (except in fatigued muscle cells).
Like many organic molecules of its size, ATP contains a good deal of chemical energy locked up 
in its structure. What makes ATP special as a reservoir of chemical energy is its role as a common 
intermediate between energy-yielding reactions and energy-requiring reactions and processes. 
Energy-yielding reactions include many of the individual steps in respiration. Energy-requiring 
reactions include the synthesis of cellulose from glucose, the synthesis of proteins from amino acids 
and the contraction of muscle fibres.
adenosine triphosphate ATP 
adenosine diphosphate ADP 
adenosine monophosphate AMP 
adenine
P
P
P
ribose
 
■Figure C1.2.2 ATP, ADP and AMP
Common 
mistake
People sometimes talk 
about ‘burning up 
food’ in respiration, but 
comparing respiration to 
combustion is unhelpful. 
In combustion, 
energy in matter is 
released in a one-step 
reaction, as heat and 
light (Figure C1.2.1). 
Such a rapid change 
would be disastrous 
for body tissues. In 
cellular respiration, 
many small steps occur, 
each catalysed by a 
specific enzyme. 
	
◆Adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP): 
a nucleotide, present in 
every living cell, formed 
in photosynthesis and 
respiration from ADP and 
Pi, and functioning in 
metabolism as a common 
intermediate between 
energy-requiring and 
energy-yielding reactions.
Link
The structure of ATP 
is detailed in Chapter 
B2.1, Figure B2.1.12, 
page 232.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.2   Cell respiration
407
In summary, ATP is a molecule universal to all living things. It is the source of energy for chemical 
change in cells, tissues and organisms. In addition, ATP is:
l	 a substance that moves easily within cells and organisms – by facilitated diffusion
l	 a very reactive molecule, able to take part in many steps of cellular respiration and in many 
reactions of metabolism
l	 an immediate source of energy, able to deliver energy in relatively small amounts, sufficient to 
drive individual reactions and physical processes.
Life processes within cells that 
ATP supplies with energy
ATP provides a direct source of energy for many life processes within cells, such as:
l	 active transport of molecules and ions across membranes by membrane pumps (Chapter B2.1)
l	 synthesis of macromolecules (anabolism, page 382, and Chapters B1.1 and B1.2)
l	 movement of the whole cell
l	 movement of cell components, such as chromosomes (Chapter D2.1).
ATP is universal to all living organisms. Because it is reactive, ATP is never stored. The conversion of 
ATP to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and phosphate ion (Pi) is thermodynamically favourable. 
The products ADP and Pi are thermodynamically more stable (lower in free energy) than the reactant 
ATP. Glucose and fatty acids are short-term energy stores, while glycogen, starch and triglycerides are 
long-term stores.
Energy transfers during interconversions 
between ATP and ADP
In cells, ATP is formed from ADP and Pi using energy from respiration. Then, in the presence of 
enzymes, ATP participates in energy-requiring reactions. Energy is released by hydrolysis of ATP to 
ADP and phosphate. The free energy available in ATP is approximately 30–4 kJ mol−1. Some of this 
energy is lost as heat in the reaction, but much free energy is made available to do useful work, more 
than sufficient to drive a typical energy-requiring reaction of metabolism (Figure C1.1.16, page 397).
Sometimes ATP reacts with water (a hydrolysis reaction) and is converted to ADP and Pi. For 
example, direct hydrolysis of the terminal phosphate group happens in muscle contraction.
Mostly, ATP reacts with other metabolites and forms phosphorylated intermediates, making them 
more reactive in the process. The phosphate groups are released later, so both ADP and Pi become 
available for reuse as metabolism continues.
Cell respiration as a system for 
producing ATP within the cell
Carbohydrates such as glucose are the preferred respiratory substrate even though the energy yield 
is lower compared to that of lipids (see page 424): this is because oxidation is easier compared 
to oxidation of other respiratory substrates, because the molecules can directly enter glycolysis. 
	
◆Adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP): 
a nucleotide, present in 
every living cell, made 
of adenosine and two 
phosphate groups 
bonded in a linear 
sequence; it is important 
in energy-transfer 
reactions of metabolism.
Top tip!
You are not required 
to know the quantity 
of energy in kilojoules 
during interconversions 
between ATP and 
ADP, but you do 
need to know that it 
is sufficient for many 
tasks in the cell, i.e. 
chemical reactions or 
physical processes.
1	 Outline why ATP 
is an efficient 
energy currency 
molecule.
Link
Fatty acids and their 
structure are discussed 
in Chapter B1.1, 
page 197.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
408
Fats need to be converted to carbohydrates through a process called gluconeogenesis before the 
glycolytic process can take place. Proteins have to be hydrolyzed into amino acids, then deaminated 
(NH2 group removed) before they can enter the respiratory pathway. This requires ATP, so the net 
production of ATP from protein is reduced. Proteins are structural molecules, and so are only used in 
respiration when other respiratory substrates, such as glucose and fats, are limited, i.e. under 
starvation conditions.
Differences between anaerobic and 
aerobic cell respiration in humans
While no oxygen is required in the early steps of cellular respiration, most animals and plants, 
and very many micro-organisms, do require oxygen for cell respiration. We say that they 
respire aerobically.
In aerobic respiration, sugar is completely oxidized to carbon dioxide and water, and much energy 
is made available. The steps of aerobic respiration can be summarized by a single equation:
 glucose 
+  oxygen 
→ 
carbon dioxide + 
water + ATP
	C6H12O6	 +	
6O2 
→ 
6CO2	
+	
6H2O + ATP
This equation is a balance sheet of the inputs (raw materials) and the outputs (products). It tells us 
nothing about the separate steps, each catalysed by a specific enzyme, by which cellular respiration 
occurs. Aerobic respiration occurs in mitochondria and produces large amounts of ATP.
In the absence of oxygen, many organisms (and sometimes tissues in organisms, when these have 
become deprived of oxygen) will continue to respire glucose by different pathways, known as 
fermentation or anaerobic respiration, at least for a short time. Anaerobic respiration occurs in the 
cytoplasm of cells and produces only a small quantity of ATP.
Vertebrate muscle tissue can respire anaerobically and results in the formation of lactic acid rather 
than ethanol. Under conditions in the cytoplasm, lactic acid is weakly ionized and, therefore, exists 
as the lactate ion.
Lactic acid fermentation occurs in muscle fibres, but only when the demand for energy for 
contractions is very great and cannot be met fully by aerobic respiration. In lactic-acid fermentation 
the sole waste product is lactate.
The steps of anaerobic respiration can be summarized by a single equation:
glucose → lactate + ATP
Top tip!
You need to know simple word equations for aerobic and anaerobic respiration, with glucose as 
the substrate. 
Common mistake
It is not correct to say that ‘respiration occurs in the mitochondria’. Mitochondria are required for 
aerobic, but not anaerobic, respiration. Anaerobic respiration occurs in the cytoplasm of cells. 
Respiration begins in the cytoplasm and ends in mitochondria.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse cell 
respiration with 
gas exchange. Gas 
exchange is the process 
where oxygen and 
carbon dioxide are 
exchanged at a surface, 
for example the 
alveoli in humans. Cell 
respiration is a chemical 
process in cells, where 
glucose is oxidized in a 
step-by-step process, 
yielding ATP.
	
◆Aerobic respiration: 
respiration requiring 
oxygen, involving the 
oxidation of glucose to 
carbon dioxide and water.
	
◆Anaerobic 
respiration: respiration 
in the absence of oxygen, 
producing either lactic 
acid (humans) or ethanol 
and carbon dioxide 
(plants and yeast).
	
◆Lactic acid: organic 
acid produced by the 
body when glucose is 
broken down to generate 
ATP in the absence 
of oxygen; lactic acid 
is formed by lactate 
in solution.
2	 Identify two 
products of 
anaerobic 
respiration in 
muscle.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.2   Cell respiration
409
Variables affecting the rate of cell respiration
There are different variables that can affect the rate of cellular respiration:
l	 Metabolic rate of the cell: e.g. muscle cells will require more energy and therefore have higher 
rates of respiration.
l	 The size of the organism: smaller organisms have a larger surface area compared to their size 
(page 262) and have a correspondingly higher respiratory rate to allow for heat loss.
l	 Supply of oxygen: cells need a constant supply of oxygen to release the maximum amount of 
ATP; inadequately supplied cells will respire anaerobically (see above).
l	 Supply of substrates for respiration, e.g. glucose. Other substrates can also be used in the 
respiratory pathway (see page 424); the rate of respiration and the quantity of products produced 
(carbon dioxide and water) will depend on the respiratory substrate.
l	 Temperature: because respiration is controlled by enzymes, temperature affects the rate of 
respiration by increasing it up to an optimum temperature.
l	 pH: the release of carbon dioxide during the process of respiration decreases the pH (i.e. 
increases acidity) of cell content and body tissues, which affects the functioning of enzymes 
involved in respiration.
Measurements can be made to determine the rate of cell respiration. Determination of the rate of cell 
respiration can be made using a respirometer (Figure C1.2.3). Respiration rate is measured by the 
uptake of oxygen per unit time. The manometer in this apparatus detects change in the pressure or 
volume of a gas. Respiration by tiny organisms (germinating seeds or fly maggots are ideal) that are 
trapped in the chamber of the respirometer alters the composition of the gas there, once the screw 
clip has been closed.
water bath
respirometer tube
the respiring organisms
give off CO2 and
absorb O2
1
CO2 is absorbed by 
the soda lime
2
manometer fluid moves to the right
due to the volume change caused
by uptake of oxygen
3
after a fixed time, the syringe is adjusted 
to level the fluid in the two arms of the 
manometer, and the volume of O2 
absorbed is read off on the syringe
4
soda lime pellets
(CO2 absorbent)
soda lime pellets
(CO2 absorbent)
glass beads (same
volume as sample in
respirometer tube) 
U-tube manometer
control tube
(thermobarometer)
graduated syringe
clips A and B are closed
hypodermic
needle
A
B
Any change in pressure or temperature during 
the experiment affects the respirometer tube 
and the thermobarometer tube equally.
 
■Figure C1.2.3 A respirometer to measure respiration rate


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
410
If soda lime is present in the chambers, the carbon dioxide gas released by the respiring organism 
is removed. In this case, only oxygen uptake by the respiring organisms causes a change in volume. 
As a result, the coloured liquid in the attached capillary tube will move towards the respirometer 
tube. The resulting reduction in the volume of air in the respirometer tube in a given time period 
can now be estimated. It is the volume of air from the syringe that must be injected back into the 
respirometer tube to make the manometric fluid level in the two arms equal again. That volume is 
equivalent to the volume of oxygen taken up by the respiring organisms.
To estimate the quantity of carbon dioxide produced by the organisms:
l	 Remove the soda lime from the apparatus (Figure C1.2.3).
l	 The difference between the distance the water moved with and without the soda lime indicates 
the volume of carbon dioxide produced.
l	 Without soda lime, carbon dioxide is not removed and the water might not move at all: if the 
same volume of oxygen is taken in as carbon dioxide is produced, there will be no change in the 
volume of gas and the water will not move.
l	 If less carbon dioxide is produced than oxygen is taken in, the fall in pressure will move the 
water a little towards the organisms.
3	 In the respirometer (Figure C1.2.3), explain how changes in temperature or pressure 
in the external environment are prevented from interfering with the measurement of 
oxygen uptake by respiring organisms in the apparatus.
4	 The experiment shown in Figure C1.2.3 was repeated with maggot fly larvae in tube 
B, first with soda lime present and subsequently with water in place of soda lime. The 
volume change with soda lime was 30 mm3 h−1, but without soda lime it was 3 mm3 h−1. 
Analyse these results, explaining the significance of each value.
Top tip!
The use of invertebrates in respirometer experiments has ethical implications. IB guidelines state 
that: ‘Any experimentation should not result in any pain or undue stress on any animal (vertebrate 
or invertebrate) or compromise its health in any way.’ Animals must be handled with care and 
must not be exposed directly to soda lime. They should only be used for brief periods of time, and 
returned to a safe environment once the experiment is completed.
 
■Calculating the rate of respiration
The respirometer can be used to measure the rate of respiration. The rate of oxygen consumption 
(mm3 min−1) can be used as the rate of respiration for organisms.
1	 Use the respirometer to measure the distance travelled by the fluid in the manometer in 
10 minutes. 
2	 The volume of oxygen absorbed and respired in 10 minutes can be calculated using the radius 
of the capillary tube, r (mm) and the distance moved by the manometer fluid, d (mm), using the 
formula: πr2d (this is the formula to work out the volume of a cylinder).
3	 The average rate of oxygen consumption can be calculated by dividing the volume of oxygen 
consumed by ten (the number of minutes).
4	 The experiment should be repeated at least five times to obtain reliable data.
Depending on how long you have to carry out this experiment, the investigation could be carried out 
for longer at each repeat. This would make the results more accurate.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.2   Cell respiration
411
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Design an experiment using a respirometer. Select an organism to use and an 
independent variable to change. You must think about the ethical issues of using 
animals and what variables you can safely change without harming the animal. If you 
are planning to alter temperature, use a plant, not an animal.
Justify the number of repeats you will use and controlled variables you will keep the same.
Formulate a hypothesis for your experiment. What effect do you expect the 
independent variable to have on the dependent variable, and why?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data; processing data
An investigation can be carried out on the rate of 
respiration of germinating peas at different temperatures.
1	 Calculate the average rate of respiration at room 
temperature, using the method outlined above in 
Inquiry 1. 
2	 Reset the apparatus by allowing air to re-enter the 
tubes by releasing the clips, and reset the manometer 
fluid using the syringe.
3	 Set up a series of water baths at 30, 40, 50 and 60 °C.
4	 Put the test tube containing the peas in the 30 °C water 
bath. Open the clips to allow the tubes to acclimatize 
(the warmth will cause the air in the respirometer to 
expand), then close the clips to begin the experiment.
5	 Record the rate of respiration.
6	 Repeat the procedure at the other temperatures.
7	 Plot a graph showing the effect of temperature on 
the rate of respiration. Temperature should be on the 
x-axis and rate of respiration on the y-axis.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding; evaluating 
Analyse and evaluate your results from your respirometer experiment: either the 
investigation you designed yourself in Inquiry 1, or the one outlined in Inquiry 2.
What do you conclude about the effect of the independent variable on the rate of 
respiration of your organism? Do your results confirm your hypothesis? How do your 
result compare with other research on this subject?
What were the limitations of the experiment and what would you do differently 
next time?
	ATL C1.2A 
Access the following site: http://amrita.olabs.edu.in/?sub=79&brch=17&sim=204&cnt=1
Investigate the effect of type of seed, number of seeds or temperature on the rate of respiration 
using a virtual respirometer. Analyse your results and write a conclusion, using your knowledge of 
cellular respiration to explain your data.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
412
The role of NAD as a carrier of hydrogen
 
■Cell respiration involves the oxidation and reduction 
of compounds
Glucose is a relatively large molecule containing six carbon atoms. During aerobic cellular 
respiration, glucose undergoes a series of enzyme-catalysed oxidation reactions and decarboxylation 
reactions (Figure C1.2.4). These reactions are grouped into three major phases and a link reaction:
l	 glycolysis, in which glucose is converted to pyruvate
l	 a link reaction, in which pyruvate is converted to acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). Carbon 
dioxide is released
l	 the Krebs cycle, in which acetyl-CoA is converted to carbon dioxide
l	 the electron transport chain, in which hydrogen that is removed in the oxidation reactions 
of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle is converted to water. The electron transport chain is a series 
of proteins that transfer electrons received from reduced coenzymes, generating a gradient 
of protons that drives the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The bulk of the ATP is 
synthesized here. 
Krebs
cycle
glucose
link
reaction
oxygen
hydrogen
atoms
H
glycolysis
ADP
+ Pi
ADP
+ Pi
carbon dioxide
some ATP
water
much ATP
some ATP
products
stages in tissue
respiration
electron
transport
chain
CO2
 
■Figure C1.2.4 The stages of aerobic cellular respiration
 
■Respiration as a series of redox reactions
The terms reduction and oxidation recur frequently in respiration. 
In cellular respiration, glucose is oxidized to carbon dioxide but, at the same time, oxygen is reduced 
to water (Figure C1.2.5). In fact, tissue respiration is a series of oxidation–reduction reactions, so 
described because when one substance in a reaction is oxidized, another is automatically reduced. 
The short-hand name for reduction–oxidation reactions is redox reactions. Redox reactions involve 
both oxidation and reduction.
In biological oxidation, oxygen atoms may be added to a compound but, alternatively, hydrogen 
atoms may be removed (dehydrogenation). In respiration, all the hydrogen atoms are gradually 
removed from glucose. When hydrogen is removed from a substrate, the substrate has been oxidized. 
The hydrogen atoms are added to hydrogen acceptors, which are thus reduced. 
Since a hydrogen atom consists of an electron and a proton, gaining hydrogen atom(s) (a case of 
reduction) involves gaining one or more electrons. In fact, the best definition of oxidation is the loss 
of electrons, and reduction is the gain of electrons. 
Top tip!
Coenzymes, for 
example acetyl 
coenzyme A (acetyl-
CoA), are substances 
that work with an 
enzyme to initiate or 
aid the function of the 
enzyme. 
Link
The roles of oxidation 
and reduction in 
biological systems 
are explored in the 
linking question 
in Chapter B1.1, 
page 204.
	
◆Reduction: the gain 
of electrons in a chemical 
reaction; this can be 
by removing oxygen 
atoms or by adding 
hydrogen atoms.
	
◆Oxidation: the 
loss of electrons in a 
chemical reaction; this 
can be by adding oxygen 
atoms or by removing 
hydrogen atoms.
	
◆Redox reaction: 
linked reaction where 
one substance loses an 
electron while the other 
gains an electron: the 
substance that gains the 
electron is said to be 
reduced while the one 
that lost the electron is 
said to be oxidized.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.2   Cell respiration
413
Top tip!
Remembering these definitions has given countless people problems, so this mnemonic has 
been devised:
OIL RIG = Oxidation Is Loss of electrons; Reduction Is Gain of electrons
6O2
C6H12O6
6CO2
6H2O
+
+
+ ENERGY
oxidation
reduction
oxidation involves:
• addition of oxygen
• removal of hydrogen
• loss of electrons
• release of energy
reduction involves:
• removal of oxygen
• addition of hydrogen
• gain of electrons
• uptake of energy
 
■Figure C1.2.5 Respiration as a redox reaction
Redox reactions take place in biological systems due to the presence of a compound with a strong 
tendency to take electrons from another compound (an oxidizing agent) or the presence of a 
compound with a strong tendency to donate electrons to another compound (a reducing agent). 
Another feature of oxidation and reduction is energy change. When reduction occurs, energy 
is absorbed (an endergonic reaction). When oxidation occurs, energy is released (an exergonic 
reaction). An example of energy release in oxidation is the burning of a fuel in air. Here, energy is 
given out as heat. 
Top tip!
The amount of energy in a molecule depends on its degree of oxidation. An oxidized substance has 
less stored energy than a reduced substance. For example, the fuel molecule methane (CH4), has 
more stored chemical energy than carbon dioxide (CO2). 
Coenzymes
In respiration, all the hydrogen atoms are gradually removed from glucose. They are added to hydrogen 
acceptors (electron carriers), which are thus reduced. These hydrogen acceptors are all coenzymes. 
Coenzymes link oxidation and reduction in cells. The electron carriers in respiration are:
l	 NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide): the main electron carrier used in respiration.
l	 FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide): a second electron carrier used in respiration.
Electron carriers can receive hydrogen atoms (i.e. are reduced), oxidizing the substance they remove 
them from. For example, NAD is reduced to NADH and H+ (reduced NAD):
NAD+ + 2H+ + 2e− → NADH + H+ (NADH can also be represented as NADH2)
Reduced NAD can pass hydrogen ions and electrons on to other acceptor molecules and, when it 
does so, becomes oxidized back to NAD.
Concept: Interaction
Coenzymes such as NAD and FAD interact with substrates involved in the respiratory 
pathway, passing hydrogen ions to other acceptor molecules, which ultimately results in 
the generation of ATP.
Link
Endergonic and 
exergonic reactions 
are covered in 
Chapter C1.1, Figure 
C1.1.15, page 397.
	
◆Coenzyme: substance 
that works with an 
enzyme to initiate or 
aid the function of the 
enzyme.
	
◆Nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide 
(NAD): a coenzyme that 
is a hydrogen carrier in 
cellular respiration. NAD+ 
is the oxidized form that 
accepts hydrogen atoms.
	
◆Flavin adenine 
dinucleotide (FAD): 
a coenzyme that is a 
hydrogen carrier in 
cellular respiration. FAD 
is the oxidized form that 
accepts two hydrogen 
atoms, forming FADH2.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
414
Glycolysis
 
■Conversion of glucose to pyruvate in glycolysis
In the first steps of cellular respiration, the glucose molecule (a 6-carbon sugar) is split into two 
3-carbon molecules. The products are converted to an organic acid called pyruvic acid (also a 
3-carbon compound). Under conditions in the cytoplasm, organic acids are weakly ionized and, 
therefore, pyruvic acid exists as the pyruvate ion. 
Two molecules of pyruvate are formed from each molecule of glucose. In addition, there is a small 
amount of ATP formed, using a little of the energy that had been locked up in the glucose molecule. 
No molecular oxygen is required for these first steps of cellular respiration.
Because glucose has been split into smaller molecules, these steps are known as glycolysis. 
The enzymes that catalyse these reactions are found in the cell cytoplasm generally, not inside 
an organelle. Throughout cellular respiration, a series of oxidation–reduction reactions occur. 
(Oxidation and reduction are explained on page 412.) 
In summary:
glucose 
 pyruvate + small amount of ATP
Details of the process are outlined below.
 
■Details of glycolysis
Glycolysis occurs in four stages: 
1	 Phosphorylation by reaction with ATP is the way glucose is first activated, forming glucose 
phosphate. Phosphorylation of molecules makes them more energetically unstable and higher 
in energy, which means that they are more reactive. Glucose phosphate is converted to fructose 
6-phosphate, and a further phosphate group is then added at the expense of another ATP molecule 
to form fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. So, two molecules of ATP are consumed per molecule of glucose 
respired at this stage of glycolysis.
2	 Lysis (splitting) of the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is the next step, forming two molecules of a 
3-carbon sugar called triose phosphate.
3	 Oxidation of the triose phosphate molecules occurs by removal of hydrogen. The enzyme for this 
reaction (a dehydrogenase) works with a coenzyme, NAD (see above).
4	 ATP formation occurs twice in the reactions by which each triose phosphate molecule is 
converted to pyruvate. This form of ATP synthesis is described as being at substrate level, in 
order to differentiate it from the bulk of ATP synthesis, which occurs later in cell respiration 
– during operation of the electron transport chain (see below). As two molecules of triose 
phosphate are converted to pyruvate, four molecules of ATP are synthesized at this stage of 
glycolysis. So, in total, there is a net gain of two ATPs in glycolysis.
	
◆Pyruvate: the end 
product of glycolysis, 
which is converted into 
acetyl-CoA that enters 
the Krebs cycle when 
there is sufficient oxygen 
available.
	
◆Glycolysis: the first 
stage of cell respiration 
in which glucose is 
converted to pyruvate 
by stepwise enzyme-
controlled reactions, 
without use of oxygen; 
ATP is generated.
	
◆Phosphorylation: 
the addition of a 
phosphoryl group (PO3
2−) 
to an organic compound.
enzymes in the cytoplasm


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.2   Cell respiration
415
P
P
P
P
P
P
2 × NAD
4 × ATP
2 × NADH + H+ 
glucose
2× ATP
glucose
+
inorganic
phosphate
phosphorylated 6-carbon sugar
(fructose 1,6-bisphosphate)
glucose is a relatively unreactive molecule
– reaction with ATP activates glucose
phosphorylated 6-carbon sugar is split
into two 3-carbon sugar phosphates
hydrogens are removed and transferred
to the hydrogen acceptor – the energy
released is used to form ATP
3-carbon sugar phosphate molecules
are converted to pyruvate
pyruvate
pyruvate
2 × pyruvate
2 lysis
(splitting of the
6-carbon backbone)
3 oxidation
+ addition of
inorganic phosphate
For each molecule of glucose:
2 molecules of ATP are used
4 molecules of ATP are formed.
There is a net gain of 2 ATPs.
4 ATP synthesis
1 phosphorylation
(uses ATP)
Changes to the carbon skeleton in glycolysis
Pi
Pi
C C C C C C
C C C C C C
C C C C C C
C C C
P
C C C
ATP
ADP
ADP
ATP
P
C C C
C C C
C C C
ADP
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
ATP
ATP
ADP
P
P
P
C C C
2 × 3-carbon sugar phosphate
(2 × triose phosphate)
+
 
■Figure C1.2.6 Glycolysis: a summary
Once pyruvate has been formed from glucose in the cytoplasm, the remainder of the pathway of 
aerobic cell respiration is located in the mitochondria. This is where the enzymes concerned with 
the link reaction, Krebs cycle and electron transport chain are all located. 
5	 State which of the following are produced during glycolysis:
carbon dioxide  NADH  ATP  pyruvate  lactate  glycogen  NAD+  glucose
 
■Subsequent steps of respiration
If oxygen is available to cells and tissues, the pyruvate is completely oxidized to carbon dioxide, 
water and a large quantity of ATP. Before these reactions take place, the pyruvate first passes 
into mitochondria by facilitated diffusion because the required enzymes are only found in the 
mitochondria (Figure C1.2.7).
In summary:
pyruvate 
 carbon dioxide + water + large amount of ATP
In this phase of cellular respiration, the pyruvate is oxidized by:
l	 the removal of hydrogen atoms by hydrogen acceptors (oxidizing agents)
l	 the addition of oxygen to the carbon atoms to form carbon dioxide.
These reactions occur one at a time, each catalysed by a different enzyme.
Top tip!
You are not required 
to know the names 
of the intermediates 
in glycolysis, but you 
do need to know 
that each step in the 
pathway is catalysed by 
a different enzyme.
enzymes in the mitochondria


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
416
In the mitochondria, the hydrogen (proton) carried by the reduced hydrogen-acceptor molecules 
reacts with oxygen to form water. The reduced hydrogen acceptor is reoxidized (loses its H) and 
is available for reuse in the production of more pyruvate. The majority of ATP molecules (the key 
product of respiration for the cell) are generated in this step.
The enzymes of cellular respiration occur partly in the cytoplasm (the enzymes of glycolysis) and 
partly in the mitochondria (the enzymes of pyruvate oxidation and most ATP formation). After 
formation, ATP passes to all parts of the cell. Both ADP and ATP pass through the mitochondrial 
membranes by facilitated diffusion. The locations of the different stages of aerobic respiration are 
shown in Figure C1.2.7.
mitochondrion
pyruvate
pyruvate → CO2 + H2O + much ATP
(aerobic cellular respiration)
occurs here
pyruvate → lactate or ethanol
(anaerobic cellular respiration)
occurs here
glucose → pyruvate + ATP
occurs here   
cytoplasm outside
the organelles
 
■Figure C1.2.7 The sites of cellular respiration in cells
Conversion of pyruvate to lactate
When oxygen is not available in human skeletal muscle tissue, the pyruvate remains in the 
cytoplasm and is converted to lactate. In yeast, whether or not oxygen is available, the pyruvate is 
converted to the alcohol called ethanol. 
How is the supply of pyruvate maintained in cells in the absence of oxygen?
This is a potential problem in the breakdown of pyruvate in the absence of oxygen. Remember, 
in pyruvate formation, hydrogen-acceptor molecules (NAD) are reduced (take up hydrogen 
atoms). Without using oxygen, these must be reoxidized (lose their H) if production of pyruvate is 
to continue.
The answer is, in anaerobic cellular respiration the reduced hydrogen-acceptor molecules (NADH) 
donate their hydrogen to form lactate or ethanol from pyruvate. They are thus reoxidized in the 
absence of oxygen and are available for further pyruvate synthesis. Pyruvate formation is able 
to continue.
This can be summarized:
 
reduced H acceptor (carrying H) 
 
reduced H acceptor
pyruvate 
 lactate pyruvate 
 ethanol + CO2
 
oxidized H acceptor (lost H) 
 
oxidized H acceptor
6	 State which 
steps in cellular 
respiration occur 
whether or not 
oxygen is available 
to cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.2   Cell respiration
417
 
■Anaerobic respiration is ‘wasteful’
Anaerobic respiration is ‘wasteful’ of respiratory substrate because the total energy yield per molecule 
of glucose respired, in terms of ATP generated, is limited to the net two molecules of ATP produced 
in pyruvate formation (in both alcoholic and lactic-acid fermentation). No additional energy is 
transferred in the latter steps and made available in cells.
So, we can think of both lactate and ethanol as energy-rich molecules. (Ethanol is sometimes used 
as a fuel in cars, for example.) The energy locked up in these molecules may be used later, however. 
In humans, lactate is transported to the liver and later metabolized aerobically. Energy yields of 
cellular respiration are compared in Table C1.2.1.
 
■Table C1.2.1 Energy yield of aerobic and anaerobic cellular respiration compared
Yield from each molecule of glucose respired
Aerobic respiration
Anaerobic respiration
2 ATPs
glycolysis
2 ATPs
up to 36 ATPs
fates of pyruvate
nil
38 ATPs
total
2 ATPs
Concept: Interdependence
The anaerobic and aerobic pathways of cellular respiration can be seen as 
interdependent. Pyruvate is produced by anaerobic respiration, which is the substrate 
that forms the basis of aerobic respiration. Anaerobic respiration in humans forms 
lactic acid if insufficient oxygen is available. This must ultimately be converted back to 
pyruvate in the liver, under aerobic conditions.
Anaerobic cell respiration in yeast and 
its use in brewing and baking
Many species of yeast (Saccharomyces) respire anaerobically, even in the presence of oxygen. 
The products are ethanol and carbon dioxide. Alcoholic fermentation of yeast has been exploited by 
humans for many thousands of years:
l	 in bread making – the carbon dioxide causes the bread to rise
l	 in wine and beer production.
glucose → ethanol + carbon dioxide + ATP
In anaerobic cell respiration, reduced NAD is oxidized through other reactions than it is for aerobic 
respiration. The pathways of anaerobic respiration are the same in humans and yeasts, except for the 
way in which NAD is regenerated and, therefore, the final products (Figure C1.2.8). In effect, oxygen 
is replaced as the hydrogen acceptor. In alcoholic fermentation, ethanal is the hydrogen acceptor, and 
in lactic acid fermentation pyruvate is the hydrogen acceptor.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
418
Here pyruvate 
is the acceptor 
for reduced 
NAD.
glucose
net gain of
2 × ATP
2×
3-carbon
phosphorylated
sugar
2 × NAD
2×
pyruvate
6CO2 + 6H2O  (aerobic
                        respiration
                       pathway)
2 × NAD
2 × ethanol
alcohol dehydrogenase
2 × ethanal
2×CO2
2 × NAD
lactate dehydrogenase
2 × lactate
alcoholic fermentation
lactate fermentation
Here ethanal is 
the acceptor for 
reduced NAD.
reduced NAD
reduced NAD
reduced NAD
 
■Figure C1.2.8 The respiratory pathways of anaerobic respiration
The link reaction in aerobic cell respiration
Pyruvate diffuses into the matrix of the mitochondrion as it forms and is metabolized there. 
First, the 3-carbon pyruvate is decarboxylated by removal of carbon dioxide and, at the same time, 
oxidized by removal of hydrogen. Reduced NAD is formed. The product of this oxidative 
decarboxylation reaction is an acetyl group – a 2-carbon fragment. This acetyl group is then 
combined with coenzyme A, forming acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). The production of acetyl 
coenzyme A from pyruvate is known as the link reaction because it connects glycolysis to reactions 
of the Krebs cycle, which follow. 
NAD+
CoA
CO2
acetyl-CoA
pyruvate
NADH + H +
The Krebs cycle
The Krebs cycle is named after Hans Krebs, who discovered it, but it is also sometimes referred to as 
the citric acid cycle, after the first intermediate acid formed.
The acetyl coenzyme A enters the Krebs cycle by reacting with a 4-carbon organic acid 
(oxaloacetate, OAA). The products of this reaction are a 6-carbon acid (citrate) and coenzyme A, 
which is released and reused in the link reaction. 
The citrate is then converted back to the 4-carbon acid (an acceptor molecule, in effect) by the 
reactions of the Krebs cycle. These involve the following changes:
l	 two molecules of carbon dioxide are released, in separate decarboxylation reactions
l	 a molecule of ATP is formed, as part one of the reactions of the cycle; as in glycolysis, this ATP 
synthesis is at substrate level
l	 three molecules of reduced NAD are formed
l	 one molecule of another hydrogen acceptor, the coenzyme flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) 
is reduced (NAD is the chief hydrogen-carrying coenzyme of respiration but FAD has this role in 
the Krebs cycle).  
	
◆Decarboxylation: 
a chemical reaction that 
releases carbon dioxide 
(usually with hydrogen 
replacing it).
	
◆Link reaction: the 
reactions that connect 
glycolysis to the reactions 
of the Krebs cycle 
by producing acetyl 
coenzyme A from 
pyruvate. Carbon dioxide 
and NADH are produced 
by this reaction.
	
◆Krebs cycle: cyclical 
metabolic process in 
aerobic cell respiration 
involving the oxidation 
and decarboxylation of 
acetyl groups, with a yield 
of ATP and reduced NAD.
Top tip!
In the Krebs cycle, you 
are required to name 
only the intermediates 
citrate (6C) and 
oxaloacetate (4C).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.2   Cell respiration
419
the link reaction
acetyl coenzyme A
(2-carbon)
pyruvate
(3-carbon)
 α−ketoglutarate
(5-carbon acid)
citrate
(6-carbon acid)
oxaloacetate 
(4-carbon acid)
Krebs
cycle
(also known as the citric acid cycle)
NADH + H+
NAD+
CO2
CO2
NAD+
NADH + H+
CO2
FADH + H+
NAD+
FAD+
NADH + H+
NAD+
ATP
NADH + H+
coenzyme A
coenzyme A
diffusion from the cytosol
into the mitochondrion
There are several other organic acid intermediates in the cycle not shown here.
    
Because glucose is converted to two molecules of pyruvate in glycolysis, the whole Krebs cycle 
sequence of reactions ‘turns’ twice for every molecule of glucose that is metabolized by aerobic 
cellular respiration (Figure C1.2.9). 
In both glycolysis and the Krebs cycle, pairs of hydrogen atoms are removed from various 
intermediates of the respiratory pathway. Either oxidized NAD is converted to reduced NAD or (on 
one occasion) an alternative hydrogen-acceptor coenzyme, FAD, is reduced. 
Now, we are in a position to summarize the changes to the molecule of glucose that occur in the 
reactions of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle. A ‘budget’ of the products of glycolysis and two turns of 
the Krebs cycle is shown in Table C1.2.2. 
 
■Table C1.2.2 Net products of aerobic respiration of glucose at the end of the Krebs cycle
Product
Step
CO2
ATP
reduced NAD
reduced FAD
glycolysis
0
2
2
0
link reaction
(pyruvate → acetyl-CoA)
2
0
2
0
Krebs cycle
4
2
6
2
Total:
6 CO2
4 ATP
10 reduced NAD
2 reduced FAD
Top tip!
Key features of the Krebs cycle are:
l	 citrate is produced by transfer of an acetyl group to oxaloacetate, and that oxaloacetate is 
regenerated by the reactions of the Krebs cycle, including four oxidations and two decarboxylations
l	 the oxidations are dehydrogenation reactions.
	ATL C1.2B 
Steps in aerobic 
respiration involve 
decarboxylation and 
oxidation. Make a copy 
of the pathway of the 
link reaction and Krebs 
cycle, and highlight 
where these types of 
reaction occur. Look 
again at Figure C1.2.6 
(glycolysis). Are both of 
these types of reaction 
observed there, too?
 
■Figure C1.2.9 Link 
reaction and Krebs 
cycle: a summary
Concept: 
Interaction
Interaction between 
intermediates in 
the Krebs cycle and 
coenzymes NAD 
and FAD allow 
decarboxylation 
and oxidation 
reactions to occur, 
which results in 
the production of 
carbon dioxide and 
reduced coenzymes.
7	 Outline the 
types of reaction 
catalysed by:
a	 dehydrogenases
b	 decarboxylases.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
420
 
■Fats can be respired
As discussed above (page 407), in addition to glucose, fats (lipids) are also commonly used as 
respiratory substrates. They are first broken down to fatty acids (and glycerol). A fatty acid is then 
‘cut up’ into 2-carbon fragments and fed into the Krebs cycle via coenzyme A. Vertebrate muscle is 
well adapted to the respiration of fatty acids in this way (as is our heart muscle), and they are just as 
likely as glucose to be the respiratory substrate. 
The electron transport chain
Reduced coenzymes pass to the electron transport chain – a series of proteins in the inner 
mitochondrial membrane. Energy is transferred when a pair of electrons is passed to the first carrier 
in the chain, converting reduced NAD (NADH) back to NAD. The reduced NAD comes from 
glycolysis, the link reaction and the Krebs cycle. The removal of electrons from hydrogen atoms 
creates H+ (protons), which then play a role in the generation of ATP (see below).
The removal of pairs of hydrogen atoms from various intermediates of the respiratory pathway is a 
feature of several of the steps in glycolysis and the Krebs cycle. On most occasions, oxidized NAD is 
converted to reduced NAD but, once in the Krebs cycle, an alternative hydrogen-acceptor coenzyme, 
FAD, is reduced. 
Therefore, in this final stage of aerobic respiration, the electrons received from the reduced 
coenzymes, i.e. from the reduced NAD (or FAD), are transported along a series of carriers to be 
combined finally with oxygen to form water (Figure C1.2.10). 
3ATP
3ADP + 3Pi
NADH + H+
NAD+
2e–
2H+
electrons passed from
carrier to carrier
energy released, and
used to make ATP
high-energy electrons
and H+ ions released
2H+
2e–
H2O
oxygen atom
combines with
electrons and
hydrogen ions
to form water
when reduced FAD is oxidized,
only two molecules of ATP are formed
1/2O2
water formed
in respiration,
e.g. from the
respiration of
food molecules,
is called
metabolic water
 
■Figure C1.2.10 Transfer of energy by reduced NAD to the electron transport chain in the mitochondrion
As electrons are passed between the carriers in the series, energy is released. Release of energy in 
this manner is controlled and can be used by the cell. The energy is transferred to ADP and Pi, to 
form ATP. Normally, for every molecule of reduced NAD that is oxidized (that is, for every pair of 
hydrogens) approximately three molecules of ATP are produced (but less when FAD is oxidized). 
The process is summarized in Figure C1.2.10. 
In total, the yield from aerobic respiration is 32 ATPs per molecule of glucose respired (Table C1.2.3).
	
◆Electron transport 
chain: a series of proteins 
that transfer electrons 
received from reduced 
coenzymes, generating a 
gradient of protons that 
drives the synthesis of 
adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP).
8	 Suggest how the 
absence of oxygen 
in respiring tissue 
might ‘switch off’ 
both the Krebs 
cycle and terminal 
oxidation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.2   Cell respiration
421
 
■Table C1.2.3 Yield from each molecule of glucose respired aerobically
Reduced NAD (or FAD)
ATP
glycolysis
(substrate level)
2
(net) = 2
2 × 2.5 = 5
link reaction
2
2 × 2.5 = 5
Krebs cycle
6
6 × 2.5 = 15
2
2 × 1.5 = 3
(substrate level)
2
Total
32
Generation of a proton gradient by flow of 
electrons along the electron transport chain
The electron-carrier proteins are arranged in the inner mitochondrial membrane in a highly ordered 
way. These carrier proteins oxidize the reduced coenzymes, and energy from the oxidation process is 
used to pump hydrogen ions (protons) from the matrix of the mitochondrion into the space between 
the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes. The hydrogen ions accumulate here. Because the 
inner membrane is largely impermeable to ions, a significant gradient in hydrogen ion 
concentration builds up across the inner membrane, generating a potential difference across the 
membrane. This represents a store of potential energy.
Chemiosmosis and the synthesis 
of ATP in the mitochondrion
 
■Phosphorylation by chemiosmosis
Chemiosmosis is a process by which the synthesis of ATP is coupled to electron transport via the 
movement of protons (Figure C1.2.11). 
The protons concentrated in the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes flow 
back into the matrix, via channels in the ATP synthase enzyme (ATPase), located in the inner 
mitochondrial membrane. As the protons flow down their concentration gradient, through the 
enzyme, the energy is transferred as ATP synthesis occurs. ATP synthase therefore couples release 
of energy from the proton gradient with phosphorylation of ADP. The ATPase has a rotational 
mechanism – energy generated by the rotation of the enzyme leads to the production of ATP.
TOK
How could a mitochondrion use the energy that is made available in the flow of electrons 
between carrier molecules to drive the synthesis of ATP?
It was a biochemist, Peter Mitchell, who in 1961 first suggested the chemiosmotic theory as the 
answer to this question. He was at an independently funded research institute in Cornwall, UK, 
studying the metabolism of bacteria. His hypothesis was not generally accepted for about 10 years – 
his ideas were, in some ways, regarded as too novel. Today, we describe the revolution that Mitchell’s 
ideas started as a paradigm shift in the field of bioenergetics. Nearly two decades later, he was 
awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery. Discuss what roles paradigm shifts have in 
the progression of scientific knowledge.
Top tip!
You do not need to 
know the names of 
protein complexes 
in the electron 
transport chain.
	
◆Chemiosmosis: 
process by which the 
synthesis of ATP is 
coupled to electron 
transport via the 
movement of protons, 
using ATP synthase.
	
◆ATP synthase 
(ATPase): a complex of 
integral proteins located 
in the mitochondrial 
inner membrane where 
it catalyses the synthesis 
of ATP from ADP and 
phosphate, driven by a 
flow of protons.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
422
outer membrane
proteins of the
electron transport
chain
outer
mitochondrial
membrane
proteins are
pumps that
transport H+
stereogram of a mitochondrion, cut open
to show the inner membrane and cristae
inner membrane
matrix
cristae
H+ H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+ H+
H+
H+
H+
H+ H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+ H+
H+
H+
2e–
NAD+
ADP + Pi
hydrogen ions 
(protons) accumulate 
here creating a 
potential difference 
across the membrane
ATP synthesis coupled with proton 
ﬂow down concentration gradient
ATP
H2O
2H+ + 1/2 O2
NADH
+
H+
2e–
2e–
2e–
2e–
inner
mitochondrial
membrane
matrix of
mitochondrion
dehydrogenase
enzyme
oxidase
enzyme
inter-membrane
space
proton channel
ATPase
 
■Figure C1.2.11 Chemiosmosis
Nature of science: Evidence
Evidence for the chemiosmosis hypothesis 
Peter Mitchell’s chemiosmotic hypothesis proposed that the energy of a proton gradient formed 
through the transfer of electrons via the electron transport chain could be used to drive ATP 
synthesis. To support the hypothesis, evidence was needed.
If the gradient drives ATP synthesis then disrupting the inner mitochondrial membrane or eliminating 
the proton gradient across it should inhibit ATP production. Both predictions were found to be 
supported by experimental evidence.
Physical disruption of the inner mitochondrial membrane stops ATP synthesis. The loss of the proton 
gradient by a chemical ‘uncoupling’ agent, such as 2,4-dinitrophenol, also inhibits mitochondrial 
ATP production. The 2,4-dinitrophenol molecule carries protons (H+) across the inner mitochondrial 
membrane, bypassing the ATP synthase complex. 
This uncoupling process takes place naturally in brown fat cells (found in hibernating mammals, such 
as bears) and results in most of the energy from the oxidation of fatty acids being released as heat, 
rather than converted to ATP.
Chemiosmotic coupling mechanisms are of ancient origin. Modern micro-organisms, including 
archaea, that live in environments similar to those thought to have been present on the early Earth, 
also use chemiosmotic coupling to produce ATP. 
	ATL C1.2C 
Find out and present 
the research work 
by Efraim Racker and 
Walther Stoeckenius 
in 1974, who used 
bacteriorhodopsin to 
provide further strong 
support for Mitchell’s 
chemiosmotic 
hypothesis. Collaborate 
with a classmate 
and use diagrams in 
your presentation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.2   Cell respiration
423
Tool 1: Experimental techniques 
Digital molecular modelling
The following site has animations of molecular models illustrating the mechanism of ATPase: 
www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk/research-groups/walker-group/molecular-animations-atp-synthase
How is the rotational movement of the enzyme generated, and how is this coupled 
with ATP synthesis?
	ATL C1.2D 
Explore the structure and function of ATPase further using the following sites:
www.sigmaaldrich.com/GB/en/technical-documents/technical-article/research-and-disease-areas/
metabolism-research/atp-synthase
www.youtube.com/watch?v=k_DQ1FjFuYM
Draw an annotated diagram to show the structure and function of ATPase.
9	 When ATP is 
synthesized in 
mitochondria, 
explain where the 
electrochemical 
gradient is 
set up, and in 
which direction 
protons move.
Role of oxygen as terminal electron 
acceptor in aerobic cell respiration
At the end of the electron transport chain, electrons need a final destination (i.e. a terminal acceptor) 
where they can be removed from the system. This enables the continued flow of electrons along the 
chain. Similarly, protons used to create the electrochemical gradient also need to be removed. The 
terminal acceptor of the electrons is oxygen, and when these are combined with protons from the 
matrix of the mitochondrion, metabolic water is formed (Figure C1.2.12).
	ATL C1.2E 
Review your knowledge of respiration using this site. Produce a mind map showing the metabolic 
pathways of aerobic and anaerobic respiration.
www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/cellularrespiration.html
flow of electrons
oxidation
oxidation
proteins in electron transport chain
energy
NADH
NAD+
2 H+
H2O
O2
FADH2
FAD
Reduction
Oxidation
Key
1
2
 
■Figure C1.2.12 Oxygen is the terminal acceptor for the electron transport chain in mitochondria


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
424
Differences between lipids and 
carbohydrates as respiratory substrates
When triglycerides are oxidized in respiration, a lot of energy is transferred (and used to make ATP 
for example, see page 406). Mass for mass, fats and oils transfer more than twice as much energy 
as carbohydrates when they are respired (Table C1.2.4). This is because fats are comparatively low 
in oxygen atoms (the carbon of lipids is more reduced than that of carbohydrates), so more of the 
oxygen in the respiration of fats comes from the atmosphere. In the oxidation of carbohydrates, more 
oxygen is present in the carbohydrate molecule itself. Fat and oils, therefore, form a concentrated 
energy store.
Because they are insoluble, the presence of fat or oil in cells does not cause osmotic water uptake. 
A fat store is especially typical of animals that endure long unfavourable spells in which they survive 
on reserves of food stored in the body. Oils are often a major energy store in plants, their seeds and 
fruits, and it is common for fruits and seeds – including maize, olives and sunflower seeds – to be 
used commercially as a source of edible oils for humans.
Complete oxidation of fats and oils produces a large amount of water, far more than when the same 
mass of carbohydrate is respired. Desert animals such as the camel and desert rat retain much of this 
metabolic water within the body, helping them survive when there is no liquid water for drinking. 
The development of bird and reptile embryos, while in their shells, also benefits from metabolic water 
formed by the oxidation of the stored fat in their egg’s yolk.
 
■Table C1.2.4 Lipids and carbohydrates as energy stores – a comparison
Lipids
Role
Carbohydrates
more energy per gram than 
carbohydrates
energy store
less energy per gram than lipids
much metabolic water is produced on 
oxidation
metabolic water 
source
less metabolic water is produced on 
oxidation
insoluble, so osmotic water uptake is 
not caused
solubility
sugars are highly soluble in water, 
causing osmotic water uptake
not quickly ‘digested’
ease of breakdown
more easily hydrolyzed – energy is 
transferred quickly
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 In what forms is energy stored in living organisms?
2	 What are the consequences of respiration for ecosystems? 
