C1.3   Photosynthesis
425
C1.3
Photosynthesis
•	 How is energy from sunlight absorbed and used in photosynthesis?
•	 How do abiotic factors interact with photosynthesis?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C1.3.1 	 Transformation of light energy to chemical energy when carbon compounds are 
produced in photosynthesis
	 C1.3.2 	 Conversion of carbon dioxide to glucose in photosynthesis using hydrogen 
obtained by splitting water
	 C1.3.3 	 Oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis in plants, algae and cyanobacteria
	 C1.3.4 	 Separation and identification of photosynthetic pigments by chromatography
	 C1.3.5 	 Absorption of specific wavelengths of light by photosynthetic pigments
	 C1.3.6 	 Similarities and differences of absorption and action spectra
	 C1.3.7 	 Techniques for varying concentrations of carbon dioxide, light intensity or 
temperature experimentally to investigate the effects of limiting factors on the 
rate of photosynthesis
	 C1.3.8 	 Carbon dioxide enrichment experiments as a means of predicting future rates of 
photosynthesis and plant growth
	 C1.3.9 	 Photosystems as arrays of pigment molecules that can generate and emit 
excited electrons (HL only)
	 C1.3.10 	Advantages of the structured array of different types of pigment molecules in a 
photosystem (HL only)
	 C1.3.11 	Generation of oxygen by the photolysis of water in photosystem II (HL only)
	 C1.3.12 	ATP production by chemiosmosis in thylakoids (HL only)
	 C1.3.13 	Reduction of NADP by photosystem I (HL only)
	 C1.3.14 	Thylakoids as systems for performing the light-dependent reactions of 
photosynthesis (HL only)
	 C1.3.15 	Carbon fixation by rubisco (HL only)
	 C1.3.16 	Synthesis of triose phosphate using reduced NADP and ATP (HL only)
	 C1.3.17 	Regeneration of RuBP in the Calvin cycle using ATP (HL only)
	 C1.3.18 	Synthesis of carbohydrates, amino acids and other carbon compounds using the 
products of the Calvin cycle and mineral nutrients (HL only)
	 C1.3.19 	Interdependence of the light-dependent and light-independent reactions (HL only)
The transformation of light energy to 
chemical energy in photosynthesis
Green plants and other photosynthetic organisms use the energy of sunlight to produce glucose 
from the inorganic raw materials carbon dioxide and water, by a process called photosynthesis. 
The waste product is oxygen. Photosynthesis occurs in plant cells that contain the organelles called 
chloroplasts (page 76), including many of the cells of the leaves of green plants. Here, energy of light 
is trapped by the green pigment chlorophyll and becomes the chemical energy in molecules such as 
glucose and ATP. This supplies most of the chemical energy needed for life processes in ecosystems.
	
◆Photosynthesis: the 
production of glucose 
from carbon dioxide and 
water, in the presence of 
chlorophyll and enzymes, 
using light energy, 
producing oxygen as a 
waste product.
	
◆Chlorophyll: the main 
photosynthetic pigments 
of green plants, occurring 
in the grana membranes 
(thylakoid membranes) 
of the chloroplasts; also 
found in cyanobacteria 
and in the chloroplasts 
of algae.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
426
Glucose formed in photosynthesis may temporarily be stored as starch, but sooner or later much is 
used in metabolism. For example, plants synthesize other carbohydrates, together with the lipids, 
proteins, growth factors and all other metabolites they require. For this, they additionally need 
certain mineral ions, which are absorbed from the soil solution. Figure C1.3.1 is a summary of 
photosynthesis and its place in plant metabolism.
glucose
oxygen
energy
ions
storage
carbohydrates,
fats and waxes
cellulose and
other wall-forming
compounds
vitamins,
hormones
and growth
factors
proteins,
enzymes,
cytoplasm
the rest of
the plant
ROOTS
the leaf
oxygen diffuses
into the
atmosphere
loss of water
vapour
carbon dioxide in air
energy from sunlight
carbon + water
dioxide
oxygen + glucose
photosynthesis
in chloroplasts
in leaf cells
water
ions actively
absorbed
oxygen from 
the air
photosynthesis: a summary
plant nutrition: a summary
The process in the chloroplast can be summarized by the equation:
carbon
dioxide
water
LIGHT
ENERGY
LIGHT
ENERGY
chlorophyll
in chloroplast
organic
compounds,
e.g. sugars
oxygen
raw materials
energy
source
products
waste
product
+
+
+
6CO2
6H2O
chlorophyll
in chloroplast
C6H12O6
6O2
+
+
+
respiration
carbon
doxide
 
■Figure C1.3.1 Photosynthesis and its place in plant nutrition
Common mistake
Do not forget to say that light is the original source of energy for photosynthesis, not simply ‘the Sun’.
 
■The wider significance of photosynthesis
The importance of photosynthesis to the green plant is that it provides the energy-rich sugar 
molecules from which the plant builds its other organic molecules. However, the advent of oxygen 
generation by photolysis (the splitting of water molecules using light energy – see page 427) had 
immense consequences for living organisms and geological processes on Earth:
1	 Photosynthesis maintains the composition of the atmosphere. For example, the quantity of 
carbon dioxide removed by plants and other photosynthetic organisms each day is almost equal 
to that added to the air from respiration and from the burning of fossil fuels. This is illustrated by 
1	 Compare the 
source of glucose 
for cellular 
respiration in 
mammals and 
flowering plants.
Link
The carbon cycle is 
covered in Chapter 
C4.2, page 594. The 
early atmosphere of 
the Earth is detailed 
in Chapter A2.1, 
page 34.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.3   Photosynthesis
427
the carbon cycle. Photosynthesis is also the only natural process that releases oxygen into the 
atmosphere. All the oxygen present in the air (about 21%) is a waste product of photosynthesis. 
This is the source of oxygen for aerobic respiration.
2	 Some of the oxygen originating from green plants is converted into ozone in the upper 
atmosphere due to the action of ultraviolet (UV) light from the Sun. As a result, ozone occurs 
naturally in Earth’s atmosphere as a layer in the stratosphere. The ozone layer protects terrestrial 
life from UV light by significantly reducing the quantity of UV that reaches the Earth’s surface. 
UV light is very harmful to living things because it is absorbed by the organic bases of nucleic 
acids (DNA and RNA), causing them to be modified. Consequently, the conversion of oxygen to 
ozone and the maintenance of the high-level ozone layer have been important in the evolution 
of terrestrial life (UV light does not penetrate water and so cannot reach aquatic organisms). 
The ozone in our upper atmosphere is important to the survival of life today.
 
■What is light?
Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation produced by the Sun. Visible light makes up only a part 
of the total electromagnetic radiation reaching the Earth. When this visible ‘white’ light is dispersed 
through a prism, we see a continuous spectrum of light – a rainbow of colours from red to violet. 
Different colours have different wavelengths and different energies.
The significance of the spectrum of light in photosynthesis is that not all the colours of the spectrum 
present in white light are absorbed equally by chlorophyll (and other pigments used in photosynthesis 
– known as accessory pigments). Some are even transmitted (or reflected), rather than being absorbed.
Biological pigments are coloured compounds produced by metabolism (enzyme-controlled 
reactions inside cells). Chlorophyll is a biological pigment: it is responsible for the green colour 
of photosynthetic organisms, which have this pigment as their primary molecule to trap sunlight 
energy. The colour of pigments results from the absorption of certain wavelengths of visible light. 
All pigment molecules have intense absorption bands in the visible region of the spectrum. The 
colour seen is the light that is not absorbed but instead is reflected.
Examples of naturally occurring coloured photosynthetic compounds include the anthocyanins, 
carotenoids (e.g. carotene) and the porphyrins (e.g. chlorophyll). 
Conversion of carbon dioxide to glucose 
in photosynthesis using hydrogen 
obtained by splitting water
Photosynthesis is a set of many reactions occurring in chloroplasts in the light. However, these can 
be conveniently divided into two main steps.
1 Light energy is used to split water (photolysis)
This releases the waste product of photosynthesis, oxygen, and allows the hydrogen atoms to be 
retained on hydrogen-acceptor molecules. The hydrogen is one requirement of Step 2. At the same 
time, ATP is generated from ADP and phosphate, also using energy from light.
2 Glucose is built up from carbon dioxide
We say that carbon dioxide is ‘fixed’ to make organic molecules. To do this, both the energy of ATP 
and hydrogen atoms from the reduced hydrogen-acceptor molecules are required. The hydrogen 
acceptors carry the hydrogens to a series of reactions that result in the formation of glucose.
Common 
mistake
It is incorrect to 
say that plants 
only undergo 
photosynthesis and 
only animals undergo 
cellular respiration. 
Plant cells also contain 
mitochondria and are 
continually respiring.
	
◆Pigment: coloured 
compounds produced by 
metabolism.
	
◆Accessory 
pigments: light-
absorbing compounds 
that trap light energy 
and channel it to 
chlorophyll a, the 
primary pigment, which 
initiates the reactions of 
photosynthesis. 
Link
Other pigments 
encountered in 
the course are 
haemoglobin, 
see Chapter B1.2, 
page 217, and 
melanin, see Chapter 
D3.2, page 744.
	
◆Photolysis: the 
splitting of water 
molecules using light 
energy.
2	 State what 
colour of light 
the pigment 
chlorophyll 
chiefly reflects or 
transmits (rather 
than absorbs).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
428
LIGHT 
ENERGY 
2H2O     O2  +  4H
water
starch
sugar
glucose built
up from carbon
dioxide and
hydrogen
in chloroplasts
light energy used
to split water
(photolysis)
carbon dioxide
CO2
oxygen
O2
glucose
H
CO2
ATP
+
reduced
hydrogen
acceptor
(carrying H)
hydrogen
acceptor
+
ADP + Pi
 
■Figure C1.3.2 
Two steps of 
photosynthesis
Top tip!
This is the simple word equation for photosynthesis, with glucose as the product. Make sure you 
know it.
carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen
light
Oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis in 
plants, algae and cyanobacteria
As we have seen above, the oxygen produced by photosynthesis comes from the splitting of water. 
The early Earth had no free oxygen and so the evolution of organisms that could release oxygen was 
critical in the development of life on Earth.
It is not only plants that carry out photosynthesis. Algae and cyanobacteria also contain 
photosynthetic pigments and produce glucose and oxygen. Cyanobacteria were the first organisms 
on Earth to produce oxygen, some 2.8 billion years ago 
(see page 34). Cyanobacteria have accessory pigments 
called phycobilins, and transfer energy from these to 
chlorophyll a. Around 1.5 billion years ago, red and 
then green algae evolved. Red algae have the same 
pigments as cyanobacteria: chlorophyll a and 
phycobilins. In particular, red algae derive most of their 
colouring from a red phycobilin called phycoerythrin. 
Green algae (Figure C1.3.3) have chloroplasts that 
contain chlorophyll a and b, giving them a bright green 
colour, as well as the accessory pigments β-carotene 
(red-orange) and xanthophylls (yellow). Unlike 
cyanobacteria and red and brown algae, they do not 
contain phycobilin pigments. 
 
■Figure C1.3.3 Photomicrograph of 
Volvox globator, a green algae. Dark 
green spots are daughter colonies 
forming inside of the parent colony
Link
The early Earth’s 
atmosphere 
composition is 
covered in Chapter 
A2.1, page 34.
3	 Define the term 
photolysis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.3   Photosynthesis
429
Separation and identification of photosynthetic 
pigments by chromatography
Chromatography is the technique we use to separate, identify and quantify the component 
pigments (or dyes) in a mixture. It is an ideal technique for separating biologically active molecules, 
since biochemists often can only obtain very small amounts of those molecules. Plant chlorophyll 
consists of a mixture of pigments. Some plant pigments are soluble in water, but chlorophyll is not. 
Chlorophyll can be extracted in an organic solvent such as propanone (acetone) (Figure C1.3.4). 
We can then identify the photosynthetic pigments in plant leaves using chromatography. 
Tool 1: Experimental techniques 
Carrying out paper chromatography
Look carefully at Figures C1.3.4 and C1.3.5, which show how to carry out 
chromatography. Details of how to interpret chromatograms are given below.
1 fresh leaves dipped into boiling water
 to kill cells, making cell membranes
 fully permeable
2 leaves ﬁnely cut and placed in
 a mortar then ground up with
 a small quantity of washed
 and dried sand (as abrasive)
3 about 20 cm3 of propanone
 (acetone) added as solvent,
 and the contents ground again
 to produce a concentrated
 chlorophyll extract
4 solution decanted into two centrifuge tubes and
 contents adjusted to balance quantities
5 tubes centrifuged to
 remove suspended organic
 matter (wall fragments,
 starch grains, etc.)
6 extracted pigment solution combined 
 and stored in the cold, in the dark, 
 as chlorophylls are unstable molecules 
 once removed from the chloroplast
 (chlorophyll solution bleaches in 
 direct sunlight)
measuring cylinder
fresh green
leaves
heat
glass rod
chlorophyll
solution
aluminium
foil
Green plants suitable to use for chlorophyll extraction
• spinach
• bougainvillea
• hibiscus
• green grass
• in Asia, the leaf vegetables kai lan or kang kong
 
■Figure C1.3.4 Steps in the extraction of plant pigments
Chromatograms are typically run on adsorbent paper (paper chromatography), powdered solid 
(column chromatography), or on a thin film of dried solid (thin-layer chromatography). The process 
is illustrated in Figure C1.3.5.
	
◆Chromatography: 
technique used to 
separate components of a 
mixture. It involves letting 
soluble substances spread 
across filter paper (or 
through a powder).
	
◆Chromatogram: 
the pattern formed on 
an adsorbent medium 
showing the result 
of separating the 
components of a mixture 
by chromatography.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
430
chlorophyll
spot
chlorophyll
solution
drop of pigment solution
‘loaded’ then dried
(process repeated
several times)
chromatography
paper
glass rods
paper chromatography
in process
bung
chromatogram
solvent front,
at point when
chromatography
run was stopped
carotene
xanthophyll
chlorophyll a –
blue–green
chlorophyll b –
green
chromatogram
ﬁtted into
slot in bung
chromatography
tank (saturated
with solvent
vapour)
loading spot
chromatography
solvent
origin (point where pigment mixture was
loaded and dried before separation)
capillary
tube
Thin-layer chromatography
(a very quick separation)
Using:
• thin-layer chromatography ‘plate’
   (plastic ﬁlm) pre-coated with
   silica gel
• chromatography ‘tank’ – ﬂat-
   bottomed tube with close-ﬁtting
   bung, containing shallow layer of 
   solvent
(Method similar to paper
chromatography.)
Indentifying pigments by Rf values
The distance a particular substance
moves up the chromatogram relative
to its solvent front is constant – this
value is known as the Rf value.
The Rf value of
chlorophyll a = 0.65
chlorophyll b = 0.45
using a solvent of nine parts
petroleum ether to one part 90%
aqueous propanone (acetone).
distance moved by solvent
distance moved by substance
=
Rf
  
 
■Figure C1.3.5 Preparing and running a chromatogram
In paper chromatography, the stationary phase is a liquid adsorbed on to the surface of the paper. 
The paper has many pores that can adsorb and form hydrogen bonds with water molecules to form 
the stationary phase. The water can be displaced by other liquids to give different stationary phases. 
Pigments that are more soluble in the solvent than they are in the water molecules of the stationary 
phase move rapidly up the paper, while those that are more soluble in the water are not carried as far 
up the paper (Figure C1.3.6).
paper
paper
solvent
mixture of two
pigments at start
slow-moving pigment more
attracted to the paper
fast-moving pigment more
attracted to the solvent
solvent moves
 
■Figure C1.3.6 The principles of paper chromatography
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) uses a stationary phase of silica or alumina particles bonded to 
a thin layer of glass or plastic. TLC separates a mixture of pigments based on how strongly they are 
adsorbed on the stationary phase and dissolved in the mobile phase (a liquid or mixture of liquids). 
This equilibrium is known as partitioning. The greater the affinity of the pigment for the stationary 
phase, the more slowly it moves along the surface of the TLC plate.
Top tip!
Chromatography 
is based upon the 
differential retention 
of compounds in a 
mobile phase as they 
pass through or across 
a stationary phase. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.3   Photosynthesis
431
The distance the spot moves from its starting location divided by the distance moved by the solvent 
is known as the Rf value (retardation factor). An Rf value is characteristic of a particular solute in a 
particular solvent. It can be used to identify components of a mixture by comparing the measured 
value with tables of known Rf values. The Rf value is calculated using the distance travelled by the 
solvent front and the distance from the origin to the centre of each spot (see Figure C1.3.5). The Rf 
value depends on the compound, solvent, temperature and other factors, such as nature of the TLC 
plate. You need to be able to calculate Rf values from the results of chromatographic separation of 
photosynthetic pigments and identify them by colour and by values. Thin-layer chromatography or 
paper chromatography can be used. Figure C1.3.5 shows how to calculate the Rf value.
4	 a	 Calculate the Rf value for the pigment in the 
experiment shown in Figure C1.3.7.
b	 Identify the pigment present using Table C1.3.1.
 
■Table C1.3.1 Rf values for different pigments
Name
Colour
Rf value
carotene
yellow
0.95
phaeophytin
yellow–grey
0.83
xanthophylls
yellow–brown
0.71
chlorophyll a
blue–green
0.65
chlorophyll b
green
0.45
3.54cm (distance 
moved by pigment)
7.9cm (solvent front)
 
■Figure C1.3.7 Calculating 
the Rf value for a pigment
	ATL C1.3A 
Access this site: http://amrita.olabs.edu.in/?sub=79&brch=17&sim=124&cnt=1
Use the simulation to test different types of plant pigment (spinach leaf extract). Move the 
hand to collect a sample of the extract and place it on the filter paper. Put the filter paper 
into the isopropyl alcohol and water, and run the simulation. Calculate the Rf values from the 
chromatography experiment.
Absorption of specific wavelengths of 
light by photosynthetic pigments
We have seen that light consists of a roughly equal mixture of all the visible wavelengths, namely 
violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red – although the names of the colours are arbitrary 
and they merge into each other. How much of each wavelength does chlorophyll absorb? We call this 
information an absorption spectrum.
	
◆Rf value: a constant 
distance that a particular 
substance moves up a 
chromatogram relative 
to its solvent front. The 
Rf value of a compound 
is equal to the distance 
travelled by the compound 
divided by the distance 
travelled by the solvent 
front (both distances 
measured from the origin).
Top tip!
Paper chromatography 
can be used to 
separate photosynthetic 
pigments but thin-layer 
chromatography (TLC) 
gives better results. 
TLC is faster, more 
sensitive and has better 
resolution than paper 
chromatography.
	
◆Absorption 
spectrum: a graph 
showing the relative 
absorbance of different 
wavelengths of light by 
a pigment. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
432
The absorption spectra (singular, spectrum) of chlorophyll 
pigments are obtained by measuring their absorption of violet, 
indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red light in turn. The results 
are plotted as a graph showing the amount of light absorbed over the 
wavelength range of visible light, as shown in Figure C1.3.8. You can 
see that chlorophyll absorbs blue and red light most strongly. Other 
wavelengths are absorbed less or not at all. It is the chemical 
structure of the chlorophyll molecule that causes absorption of the 
energy of blue and red light.
Within a pigment molecule, absorption of light excites electrons. 
Accessory pigments transfer excited electrons to chlorophyll a, which 
leads to a series of reactions that ultimately lead to the formation of 
glucose. In this way, light energy is transformed to chemical energy. 
5	 Absorption spectra for two coloured substances, A and B, are shown in Figure C1.3.9. 
Identify the colour of each substance. Explain your answer. 
absorbance
300
0
400
500
600
700
wavelength/nm
Substance A
Substance B
800
100
absorbance
300
0
400
500
600
700
wavelength/nm
800
100
 
■Figure C1.3.9 Absorption spectra for substances A and B
Similarities and differences of 
absorption and action spectra
The action spectrum of chlorophyll is the wavelengths of light that are used in photosynthesis. 
This may be discovered by projecting light of different wavelengths, in turn and for a unit of time, on 
aquatic green pond weed. This is carried out in an experimental apparatus in which the rate of 
photosynthesis can be measured. The gas evolved by a green plant in the light is largely oxygen, and 
the volume given off in a unit of time is a measure of the rate of photosynthesis. Suitable apparatus is 
shown in Figure C1.3.11 (page 435).
Top tip!
Unless colours 
are shown in an 
absorption spectrum 
(Figure C1.3.9), both 
wavelengths and 
colours of light should 
be included on the 
horizontal axis of 
absorption spectra. 
This enables the graph 
to be easily interpreted 
with each pigment 
related to the colour of 
light it absorbs.
	
◆Action spectrum: 
range of wavelengths 
of light within 
which a process like 
photosynthesis takes 
place.
wavelength/nm
absorbance
0.0
0.5
500
violet
blue
green
yellow
orange
red
700
 
■Figure C1.3.8 The absorbance spectrum of chlorophyll


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.3   Photosynthesis
433
The rate of photosynthesis at different wavelengths may then be plotted on a graph on the same scale 
as the absorption spectrum (Figure C1.3.10). We have seen that blue and red light wavelengths are 
most strongly absorbed by chlorophyll. From the action spectrum, we see that it is these wavelengths 
that give rise to the highest rates of photosynthesis.
b action spectrum
    record of amount
    of photosynthesis occurring
    at each wavelength
a absorption spectrum
    measured using a spectrometer
wavelength/nm
blue light
red light
600
500
700
The results show that the wavelengths
of light absorbed by photosynthetic
pigments (largely red and blue) are very
similar to the wavelengths that drive
photosynthesis.
400
amount of photosynthesis
600
500
chlorophyll b
carotenoids
chlorophyll a
wavelength/nm
700
400
amount of absorption
violet
blue
green
yellow
orange
red
 
■Figure C1.3.10 Absorption and action spectra of chlorophyll pigments
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting and processing data; interpreting results
Rates of photosynthesis can be determined from data for oxygen production and 
carbon dioxide consumption for varying wavelengths. These data can be plotted to 
make an action spectrum.
Set up an experiment to measure the effects of varying wavelengths on the rate of 
photosynthesis. Pondweed or other aquatic plants can be used to measure the rate 
of photosynthesis (see Figure C1.3.11 below). Use different colour filters in front 
of the light source so that the plant is exposed to a range of different colours of 
light. Coloured plastic film can be used to make a filter. You should aim to cover the 
full spectrum.
Carry out a series of experiments, each using a different coloured filter, and measure 
the rate of photosynthesis for each colour by counting the number of bubbles of 
oxygen produced by the aquatic plant per minute. Each colour represents a different 
wavelength of light. You should also carry out an experiment with no filter, to measure 
the effects of white light. You should repeat each experiment (ideally five times) to 
ensure your results are reliable. 
Which variables will you need to keep the same and how will you do this?
Use your data to plot an action spectrum, with wavelength of light on the x-axis and 
rate of photosynthesis (measured by number of bubbles of oxygen produced per 
minute) on the y-axis. Identify, describe and explain the patterns you see. Which colours 
of light generated the greatest rate of photosynthesis, and which the lowest? Use your 
knowledge of photosynthesis and photosynthetic pigments to explain your results.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
434
Going further
Chlorophyll in solution versus chlorophyll in the chloroplast
The chlorophyll that has been extracted from leaves and dissolved in an organic solvent 
still absorbs light. However, chlorophyll in solution cannot use light energy to make sugar 
(in the form of glucose). This is because, in the extraction process, chlorophyll has been 
separated from the membrane systems and enzymes that surround it in chloroplasts. 
These are also essential for carrying out the biochemical steps of photosynthesis.
Investigating the effects of limiting 
factors on the rate of photosynthesis
Hypotheses can be suggested for the effects of the following limiting factors: concentrations of 
carbon dioxide, light intensity and temperature. A limiting factor for photosynthesis is an 
environmental factor that, when in short supply, affects rate of photosynthesis. There are various 
protocols for investigating these limiting factors, based upon an understanding of photosynthesis. 
In the following sections, you will be asked to develop a hypothesis about the effect of one limiting 
factor on the rate of photosynthesis. You will then be told about the expected results and reasons 
for these.
Nature of science: Hypotheses
Hypotheses are provisional explanations that require repeated testing. Scientists make provisional 
explanations for the patterns that they have observed in natural phenomena. During scientific 
research, hypotheses can either be based on theories then tested in an experiment, or be based 
on evidence from an experiment already carried out. Evidence is required to obtain support for a 
hypothesis or show that it is false. In the sections below, you will be asked to suggest hypotheses 
for the effects of limiting factors on photosynthesis (concentration of carbon dioxide, light intensity 
and temperature). Note: you should be able to identify the dependent and independent variables in 
experiments investigating the effects of limiting factors on the rate of photosynthesis.
 
■Measuring the rate of photosynthesis
A protocol for investigating limiting factors on the rate of photosynthesis is discussed in this section.
An illuminated, freshly cut shoot of a pondweed, when inverted, produces a vigorous stream of gas 
bubbles from the base. The bubbles tell us the pondweed is actively photosynthesizing. At the same 
time, dissolved carbon dioxide is being removed from the water. Suitable plants include Elodea, 
Myriophyllum and Cabomba. The rate of photosynthesis can be estimated using one of the following:
l	 A microburette to measure the volume of oxygen given out in the light (Figure C1.3.11). The 
pondweed is placed in a very dilute solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate, which supplies the 
carbon dioxide (as HCO3) required by the plant for photosynthesis. The quantity of gas evolved 
in a given time, say in 30 minutes, is measured by drawing the gas bubble that collects into the 
capillary tube, and measuring its length. This length is then converted to a volume.
l	 An oxygen sensor probe connected to a data-logging device.
l	 A pH meter connected to a data-logging monitor. The uptake of carbon dioxide from the water 
will cause the pH to rise.
6	 Define the term 
limiting factor.
7	 A thermometer 
is not shown in 
the apparatus in 
Figure C1.3.11. 
Predict why one is 
required, and state 
where it should 
be positioned.
8	 Explain why 
the cut stem of 
pondweed was 
inverted here.
Link
Further details and 
the definition of 
limiting factors are 
covered in Chapter 
B4.1, page 344. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.3   Photosynthesis
435
syringe
LIGHT
Elodea
end of
capillary tube
capillary
tube
plastic tube
stand
stop clock
bubble of gas
being measured
dilute hydrogencarbonate
solution
heat
trap
bubble
of gas
collecting
microburette
small gas 
bubble
 
■Figure C1.3.11 Measuring the rate of photosynthesis with a microburette
You can use one or more of these techniques to investigate the effects of external conditions on the 
rate of photosynthesis (Table C1.3.2). Explore protocols investigating these limiting factors, based 
upon your understanding of photosynthesis, and test these by experimentation.
 
■Table C1.3.2 Issues in the design of experiments to investigate the 
effect of external factors on the rate of photosynthesis
Carbon dioxide concentration
Light intensity
O2 output (bubbles or volume) in unit 
time
dependent variable
O2 output (bubbles or volume) or pH 
change in unit time
external CO2
(i) absence of CO2 by boiling and cooling 
water
(ii) subsequent stepwise addition 
of NaHCO3 solution to raise CO2 by 
0.01 mol dm−3 until no further change in 
O2 output
independent 
variable
light intensity – systematically positioning 
the light source (photoflood lamp or 
150 W bulb) at 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 cm 
from the experimental chamber
temperature, light intensity
controlled variables
concentration of NaHCO3, temperature
possibly errors in NaHCO3 solution 
additions
sources of error
possibly the heating effect of the light 
source
	ATL C1.3B 
Access the following site: www.biologysimulations.com/cell-energy-sim
Alter the number of plants, fish and temperature to explore how limiting factors affect the 
balance between respiration and photosynthesis, and correspondingly the concentration of 
oxygen in the environment. Write a summary of the investigation, and how inputs and outputs 
from respiration and photosynthesis make both processes interdependent.
 
■External factors and the rate of photosynthesis
Using your knowledge of photosynthesis, develop hypotheses to predict the effect on the rate 
of photosynthesis of separately changing three different independent variables: carbon dioxide 
concentration, light intensity and temperature. Once you have done this, read on.
9	 Look at Table 
C1.3.2. Discuss 
further controlled 
variables and 
sources of error 
not included in 
this table.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
436
Tool 3: Mathematics 
Sketch graphs
Sketch graphs have labelled but unscaled axes to qualitatively describe trends, whereas 
graphs have units in both axes and use numerical data. Figures C1.3.12, C1.3.13 and 
C1.3.14 show examples of sketch graphs and indicate how these should be drawn.
The effect of carbon dioxide concentration
The effect of the concentration of carbon dioxide on the rate 
of photosynthesis is shown in Figure C1.3.12. Look at this sketch 
graph and note the shape of the curve.
In this experiment (Figure C1.3.12):
l	 when the concentration of carbon dioxide is at zero, there is 
no photosynthesis
l	 as the concentration is steadily increased, the rate of 
photosynthesis rises, and the rate of that rise shows positive 
correlation with the increasing carbon dioxide concentration 
(carbon dioxide is a limiting factor)
l	 at much higher concentrations of carbon dioxide, the rate 
of photosynthesis reaches a plateau. Some other factor is 
limiting the rate, e.g. light intensity or temperature.
Common mistake
Refer to the concentration of carbon dioxide rather than 
‘amount’, ‘level’ or ‘quantity’.
The effect of light intensity
The effect of light intensity on the rate is shown in 
Figure C1.3.13. Look at this sketch graph – the shape of the curve is 
familiar. Then answer question 10.
Figure C1.3.13 shows the following:
l	 As the light intensity increases, the rate of photosynthesis 
rises – the rate of that rise is positively correlated with the 
increasing light intensity. Light intensity is the limiting factor.
l	 At much higher light intensities, the rate of photosynthesis 
reaches a plateau – now there is no increase in rate with 
rising light intensity. Some other factor is limiting the rate, 
e.g. carbon dioxide concentration or temperature.
rate of photosynthesis
(arbitrary units)
CO2 concentration
at high CO2 concentration the
rate no longer increases with
increasing CO2 concentration
– a plateau is reached
here the rate is correlated with
the CO2 concentration
no photosynthesis
0
 
■Figure C1.3.12 The effect of carbon dioxide 
concentration on photosynthesis
light intensity
rate of photosynthesis
(arbitrary units)
 
■Figure C1.3.13 The effect of light intensity on photosynthesis
10	Explain what the sketch graph implies about the 
relationship between light intensity and the rate 
of photosynthesis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C1.3   Photosynthesis
437
The shape of the sketch graph in Figure C1.3.14 can be 
explained by enzyme collision theory (Chapter C1.1).
l	 As temperature increases, the enzymes involved in 
photosynthesis have increased kinetic energy, as do their 
substrates.
l	 There are increased collisions between enzymes and 
substrates, resulting in more enzyme–substrate complexes 
and increased rate of reaction.
l	 These reactions reach an optimum rate at a specific 
temperature.
l	 Above the optimum rate, as the temperature rises further the 
enzymes involved with the fixation of carbon dioxide cannot 
work effectively.
Common 
mistake
It is not correct to 
say that the rate of 
photosynthesis reduces 
at higher temperatures 
because of enzyme 
denaturation. The 
rate reduction occurs 
at much lower 
temperatures than 
those at which this 
denaturation would 
occur. The problem at 
higher temperatures 
is due to an enzyme 
(RuBisCo – see 
page 445 if you are 
studying HL) failing 
to fix carbon dioxide 
effectively.
rate of photosynthesis
(arbitrary units)
temperature/°C
here temperature
increases the rate
with increasing effect
optimum temperature
above the optimum
temperature the
rate falls off steeply
as the temperature
is raised further
 
■Figure C1.3.14 The effect of temperature on photosynthesis
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Accurately measuring temperature
The SI unit for the temperature is the Kelvin (k). However, most thermometers are 
calibrated with a temperature scale in degree Celsius (°C) a non-SI unit. Electronic 
(digital) thermometers are now commonly used to measure temperature, as they 
are more accurate than alcohol-in-glass type thermometers. Accuracy reflects how 
close to the true value measurements can be taken. Uncertainties are given for lab 
equipment, which indicate a range within which we are confident that the true value 
lies. The uncertainly for digital thermometers is ± 0.1 °C.
Tool 2: Technology
Generating data from simulations
Access this site: https://iwant2study.org/lookangejss/biology/ejss_model_
photosynthesis/photosynthesis_Simulation.xhtml
Alter the concentration of light or the concentration of carbon dioxide by selecting 
experiment 1 or experiment 2, respectively, to investigate the effect of these limiting 
factors on the rate of photosynthesis.
Start with a light intensity of ‘1’. Press ‘play’ to count the number of bubbles in one minute. 
The data point will automatically be plotted. Now move  the light intensity to ‘2’ using the 
↕ button, and press play. Repeat this until you have completed all light intensities.
The simulation automatically plots a graph of your data. Explain the shape of each 
graph using your knowledge of photosynthesis and limiting factors.
The effect of temperature
The effect of temperature on the rate of photosynthesis is shown in Figure C1.3.14. Here the curve 
of the sketch graph is an entirely different shape. At relatively low temperatures, as the temperature 
increases, the rate of photosynthesis increases more and more steeply. However, at higher temperatures, 
the rate of photosynthesis abruptly stops rising and actually falls steeply. The result is a clear optimum 
temperature for photosynthesis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
438
Carbon dioxide enrichment experiments
Nature of science: Experiments
Finding methods for careful control of variables is part of experimental design. This may be easier 
in the laboratory but some experiments can only be done in the field. Field experiments include 
those performed in natural ecosystems. You need to be able to identify a controlled variable in an 
experiment. For example, in photosynthesis experiments one limiting factor is changed at a time 
to determine its effect on the rate of photosynthesis (page 434). Controlled variables enable you 
to keep other variables that may affect the dependent variable the same, so that the impact of the 
independent variable on the dependent variable can be determined. In ecological field experiments, 
where other variables cannot be controlled (such as light intensity or rainfall), variables that may 
affect the dependent variable need to be monitored to determine any potential impact (see 
Chapter C4.1, page 572).
Carbon dioxide enrichment experiments are a means of predicting future rates of photosynthesis 
and plant growth. They include enclosed greenhouse experiments and free-air carbon dioxide 
enrichment experiments (FACE).
Enclosed greenhouse experiments manipulate variables that can affect photosynthesis, such as 
sunlight, wavelength of light and temperature, using greenhouses (or polytunnels) to control other 
variables (hence the term ‘enclosed’ greenhouse). The plants used in these experiments need to be 
small enough to fit into greenhouses, and data gathered do not directly relate to changes that would 
been seen in natural ecosystems.
FACE experiments pump carbon dioxide into the air to raise 
the local concentration of the gas in forests, grasslands and 
agricultural fields (Figure C1.3.15). Compared to enclosed 
greenhouse experiments, FACE experiments are in natural 
ecosystems, and can investigate the effects of carbon 
dioxide enrichment on large producers such as trees. Unlike 
greenhouses, other variables cannot be controlled (such as 
rainfall and sunlight) and so need to be monitored.
Duke University’s FACE project in North Carolina, USA, began 
operating in 1996 and is the oldest forest FACE project. It has 
since been completed and was used to study the response of 
a temperate coniferous forest to high levels of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Tree growth and productivity under conditions 
of at least 550 parts per million of carbon dioxide – over 1.25 
times higher than present levels – were monitored. 
With global carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere continuing to rise (see Chapter C4.2), predicting 
the effects that this increase will have on biological systems is urgent. 
	ATL C1.3C 
Read more about the Duke Forest FACE carbon dioxide enrichment experiment in this scientific 
paper: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/3-540-31237-4_11 
Find out about carbon dioxide enrichment experiments in your country or region. How are they 
being used to predict future rates of photosynthesis and plant growth?
How could you set up a small carbon dioxide enrichment experiment in your school or college? 
What equipment would you need and what data would you collect?
 
■Figure C1.3.15 One of the FACE plots set up by Duke University 
to provide elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.3   Photosynthesis
439
The light-dependent and light-independent 
reactions of photosynthesis: introduction
Photosynthesis is a complex set of many reactions that takes place in illuminated chloroplasts. 
Biochemical investigations of photosynthesis by several teams of scientists have established that the 
many reactions by which light energy brings about the production of glucose, using the raw materials 
water and carbon dioxide, fall naturally into two interconnected stages (Figure C1.3.16).
l	 The light-dependent reactions use light energy to split water (photolysis). Hydrogen is then 
removed and retained by the photosynthesis-specific hydrogen acceptor, known as NADP+. 
(NADP+ is very similar to the respiration coenzyme NAD+, but it carries an additional phosphate 
group, hence NADP.) At the same time, ATP is generated from ADP and phosphate, also using 
light energy. This is known as photophosphorylation. Oxygen is given off as a waste product of 
the light-dependent reactions. This stage occurs in the grana of the chloroplast.
l	 The light-independent reactions synthesize glucose using carbon dioxide. The products of 
the light-dependent reactions (ATP and reduced hydrogen acceptor NADPH + H+) are used in 
glucose production. This stage occurs in the stroma of the chloroplast. It requires a continuous 
supply of the products of the light-dependent reactions but does not directly involve light 
energy (hence the name). Names can be misleading because this stage is an integral part of 
photosynthesis, and photosynthesis is a process that is powered by light energy. 
photosynthesis
water split
(CH2O)
carbohydrate
CO2 reduced
CO2
light-dependent reactions
light-independent reactions
in
out
light
in
NADPH + H+ 
ATP
grana
H2O
stroma
NADP+
ADP + Pi
1/2O2
 
■Figure C1.3.16 The two sets of reactions of photosynthesis, inputs and outputs
We shall now look at both sets of reactions in turn to understand more about how these complex 
changes are brought about. 
The light-dependent reactions
 
■Photosystems
Photosystems are arrays of pigment molecules (with associated proteins) that can generate and emit 
excited electrons. Photosystems are always located in membranes and they occur in cyanobacteria 
and in the chloroplasts of photosynthetic eukaryotes. 
In the light-dependent stage, light energy is trapped by the photosynthetic pigment, chlorophyll. 
Chlorophyll molecules do not occur haphazardly in the grana. Rather, they are grouped together in 
structures called photosystems, held in the thylakoid membranes of the grana (Figure C1.3.17). 
Link
Grana and thylakoid membranes are covered in Chapter A2.2, page 76.
	
◆Light-dependent 
reactions: part 
of photosynthesis 
occurring in the grana of 
chloroplasts and requiring 
light; water is split and 
ATP and NADPH are 
generated.
	
◆Photophos­phory­
lation: the formation of 
ATP using light energy (in 
the light-dependent step 
of photosynthesis).
	
◆Light-independent 
reactions: part of 
photosynthesis occurring 
in the stroma of 
chloroplasts; it uses the 
products of the light-
dependent step to reduce 
(or fix) carbon dioxide 
to glucose.
	
◆Photosystems: 
molecular arrays of 
chlorophyll, accessory 
pigments and proteins 
(light-harvesting 
complexes) with a 
special chlorophyll as 
the reaction centre from 
which an excited electron 
is emitted.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
440
light absorbed 
thylakoid
membrane 
many pigment molecules
(chlorophyll and accessory
pigments) 
energy funnelled
to reaction centre
reaction centre of
chlorophyll a
(absorbing energy
at 700 nm – PS I,
or at 680 nm – PS II)
excited electrons
released from here
and replaced by
low-energy
(= ground-state)
electrons 
 
■Figure C1.3.17 Generalized structure of photosystems
In each photosystem, several hundred chlorophyll molecules, plus accessory pigments (carotene and 
xanthophylls) and proteins (light-harvesting complexes or LHCs) are arranged. All these pigment 
molecules harvest light energy of slightly different wavelengths, and they funnel the energy to a single 
chlorophyll molecule of the photosystem, known as the reaction centre. The chlorophyll is 
then photoactivated.
There are two types of photosystem present in the thylakoid membranes of the grana, identified by 
the wavelength of light that the chlorophyll of the reaction centre absorbs:
l	 Photosystem I has a reaction centre that is activated by light of wavelength 700 nm. 
This reaction centre is referred to as P700.
l	 Photosystem II has a reaction centre that is activated by light of wavelength 680 nm. 
This reaction centre is referred to as P680.
Generating and emitting excited electrons – the transfer of light energy
When light energy reaches a reaction centre, ground-state electrons in the reaction centre of 
chlorophyll molecules are raised to an ‘excited state’ by the light energy received. As a result, high-
energy electrons are released, and these electrons bring about the biochemical changes of the light-
dependent reactions. The spaces vacated by the high-energy (excited) electrons in the reaction 
centres are continuously refilled by ground-state electrons. 
We will examine this sequence of reactions in the two photosystems next. 
	
◆Light-harvesting 
complex (LHC): an array 
of protein and chlorophyll 
molecules embedded in 
the thylakoid membrane 
of plants, algae and 
cyanobacteria, which 
transfer light energy 
to one chlorophyll a 
molecule at the reaction 
centre of a photosystem.
	
◆Photosystem I: 
a chlorophyll–protein 
complex that uses light 
energy to release excited 
electrons, replacing each 
lost electron by one in the 
ground state (electrons 
are received from 
photosystem II).
	
◆Photosystem II: a 
membrane super-complex 
of proteins and several 
hundred chlorophyll 
molecules, plus accessory 
pigments, that carries 
out the initial reaction of 
photosynthesis; light from 
the Sun excites electrons, 
which pass down an 
electron transport 
chain: these electrons 
are replaced by splitting 
water to release protons 
and electrons.
	
◆Ground-state 
electrons: the energy 
level normally occupied 
by an electron; the state 
of lowest energy for an 
electron.
	
◆High-energy 
(excited) electrons: 
chlorophyll in 
photosystems I and II 
absorbs light energy 
(photons), which increases 
the energy level of 
electrons.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.3   Photosynthesis
441
The structured array of different types of pigments and 
accessory pigments enables light energy to excite electrons 
in a controlled way and direct these electrons along electron 
transport chains (Figure C1.3.18). The variety of different 
pigments allow plants to harvest light from a range of 
different wavelengths, increasing the flow of electrons to 
the reaction centre. The two photosystems work in tandem 
– receiving light energy, releasing excited electrons and 
replacing each lost electron by one in the ground state 
(photosystem II electrons come from the splitting of water 
molecules; photosystem I electrons from photosystem II – see 
below). A single molecule of chlorophyll or any other pigment 
would not be able to perform any part of photosynthesis; 
a series of different molecules is needed to harvest a range 
of wavelengths of light and to pass the excited electrons 
resulting from this on to the reaction centre. 
thylakoid
membrane
reaction
centre
stroma
pigment
molecules
chlorophyll a
special pair
light
e−
thylakoid lumen
light-
harvesting
complex
primary
electron
acceptor
thylakoid
membrane 
 
■Figure C1.3.18 Transfer of electrons in a photosystem
	ATL C1.3D 
Research the structure and function of each photosystem. How does their structure relate to their 
function? How are the photosystems of cyanobacteria different to those of higher plants? How 
and why did these changes come about?
11	Define the term 
photosystem.
12	Construct a table 
that identifies the 
components of the 
two photosystems 
and the role of 
each one.
 
■Generation of oxygen by the photolysis of water in 
photosystem II
After receiving light energy, excited electrons from photosystem II are accepted and passed along a 
chain of electron carriers. As a result of these energy transfers, the excitation level of the electrons 
falls back to the ground state and they come to fill the vacancies in the reaction centre of 
photosystem I. Electrons have been transferred from photosystem II to photosystem I (see below).
Meanwhile the vacancies in the reaction centres of photosystem II are filled by electrons (in their 
ground state) from water molecules. Photosystem II is a catalyst that splits the water molecule 
(photolysis). This event triggers the release of hydrogen ions and oxygen atoms, as well as ground-
state electrons. 
Top tip!
Photosystem II is called ‘II’ as it was discovered after photosystem I. The names of the two 
photosystems do not represent the electron flow as this begins in photosystem II.
Top tip!
Protons is an alternative 
term to hydrogen ions, 
and the terms can be 
used interchangeably.
 
■Advantages of the structured array of different types of 
pigment molecules in a photosystem
Photosystems I and II have specific and differing roles. However, they occur grouped together in 
the thylakoid membranes of the grana, along with LHC proteins that function quite specifically.
These LHC proteins consist of: 
l	 enzymes 
l	 catalysing formation of ATP from ADP and phosphate (Pi)
l	 catalysing conversion of the oxidized hydrogen carrier NADP+ to the reduced carrier NADPH + H+
l	 electron carrier molecules.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
442
From the split water molecule, the oxygen atoms combine to form molecular oxygen, the waste 
product of photosynthesis. The hydrogen ions are used in the reduction of NADP+ as shown in the 
annotated equation here:
H2O
2 H+    +    2 e−    +      O2
1
2
Reduced NADP
Photosystem II
NADP
 
■ATP production by chemiosmosis in thylakoids
In the grana of the chloroplasts, the synthesis of ATP is coupled to electron transport via the 
movement of protons by chemiosmosis, as it was in mitochondria. Here, it is the hydrogen ions 
trapped within the thylakoid space that activate the rotatory mechanism of ATP synthase enzymes 
(see page 250), moving down their electrochemical gradient. At the same time, ATP is synthesized 
from ADP and Pi.
As excited electrons from photosystem II pass along the electron transport chain or electron carriers, 
some of the energy causes the pumping of hydrogen ions (protons) from the chloroplast’s matrix 
into the thylakoid spaces. Here, protons accumulate, causing the pH to drop. The result is a proton 
gradient that is created across the thylakoid membrane, which sustains the synthesis of ATP. Protons 
pass down their electrochemical gradient through ATP synthase (ATPase), resulting in the synthesis 
of ATP. This is another example of chemiosmosis (page 421). Figure C1.3.19 shows the process of 
chemiosmosis in chloroplasts and mitochondria.
ADP + Pi
ATP
synthase
ATP
mitochondrion
chloroplast
stroma
thylakoid
space
mitochondrion
structure
chloroplast
structure
matrix
diffusion
electron
transport
chain
plasma
membrane
intermembrane
space
H+
H+
higher (H+)
lower (H+)
Key:
 
■Figure C1.3.19 Chemiosmosis occurs in both mitochondria and chloroplasts
We have seen that the excited electrons that provided the energy for ATP synthesis originate 
from water and move on to fill the vacancies in the reaction centre of photosystem II. They are 
subsequently moved on to the reaction centre in photosystem I, and finally are used to reduce 
NADP+ (see below).
13	Suggest the likely 
fate of starch 
stored in a green 
leaf during periods 
of darkness.
Top tip!
You can either use 
the terms ‘NADP and 
reduced NADP’ or 
‘NADP+ and NADPH’, 
but whichever you 
choose should be 
paired consistently.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.3   Photosynthesis
443
 
■Reduction of NADP by photosystem I
The excited electrons from photosystem I are passed two at a time to the electron acceptor NADP+, 
which, with the addition of a hydrogen ion from the stroma, is reduced to form NADPH + H+.
Because the pathway of the electrons from photosystem II and then on to photosystem I is linear, 
with electrons being accepted by NADP+, the photophosphorylation reaction in which they are 
involved is described as non-cyclic photophosphorylation (Figure C1.3.20).
The electrons released by photosystem I are transferred back to P700 (photosystem I) instead of 
moving into the NADP+ from NADPH + H+. This movement of electrons from an acceptor to P700 
results in the formation of ATP molecules. Electrons cycle repeatedly through photosystem I and the 
first portion of the electron transport chain but do not pass through photosystem II, and so NADPH 
is not formed, and water is not needed to replenish the electron supply. Because the electrons 
move in a cyclic manner, this production of ATP is known as cyclic photophosphorylation 
(Figure C1.3.20).
	
◆Non-cyclic photophosphorylation: process used to produce NADPH in addition to ATP; requires 
the presence of water.
	
◆Cyclic photophosphorylation: process that produces a steady supply of ATP in the presence 
of sunlight.
PS I
2e–
2e–
PS II
2e –
If NADP runs out: 
cyclic phosphorylation
chemiosmosis along
electron-carrier system
ATP
LIGHT
680nm
LIGHT
700nm
2e –
NADP
reduced NADP
photolysis
4H+ + O2
ADP
+
Pi
2H2O
non-cyclic
photophosphorylation
Key
= non-cyclic photophosphorylation
= cyclic photophosphorylation
2e–
Non-cyclic photophosphorylation
•  The normal ﬂow of electrons is from water, via PS II and
    electron carriers to both PS I and NADP.
•  The excited electrons from PS II, as they lose the energy of the
    excited state, cause hydrogen ions (protons) to be pumped across into
    the thylakoid space.
•  The gradient in protons between thylakoid space and the stroma
    causes protons to ﬂow through ATP synthase and generate ATP.
Cyclic photophosphorylation
•  Occurs when reduced NADP accumulates in the stroma – e.g. when CO2
    concentration is low and the light-independent stage is blocked. 
•  Cyclic photophosphorylation results – excited electrons from PS I are
    captured by electron acceptors serving PS II, and then returned to a ground
    state (pumping protons as they go), to reoccupy their original space in PS I.
•  The proton gradient between the thylakoid space and the stroma is
    maintained and ATP formation continues. 
 
■Figure C1.3.20 Cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation
15	In non-cyclic photophosphorylation, outline the ultimate fate of electrons displaced 
from the reaction centre of photosystem II.
16	Both reduced NADPH and ATP, products of the light stage of photosynthesis, are formed 
on the side of thylakoid membranes that face the stroma. Suggest why this fact is 
significant. 
17	Explain how the gradient in protons between the thylakoid space and the stroma 
is generated.
18	Using a table, compare and contrast cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation.
14	Construct a 
table comparing 
chemiosmosis 
in mitochondria 
and chloroplasts. 
Include the 
site of proton 
accumulation, 
the origin of 
the protons, the 
energy source and 
fate of the ATP 
that is formed.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
444
ATP and reduced NADP do not normally accumulate, however, as they are immediately used in 
the fixation of carbon dioxide in the surrounding stroma (light-independent reactions, page 439). 
Then the ADP and NADP+ diffuse back into the grana for reuse in the light-dependent reactions. 
By this sequence of reactions, repeated again and again at very high speed throughout every second 
of daylight, the products of the light-dependent reactions (ATP and NADPH + H+) are formed 
(Figure C1.3.21). 
 
■Thylakoids as systems for performing the light-dependent 
reactions of photosynthesis
Top tip!
The grana are the site of the light-dependent reactions, while the stroma is the site of the light-
independent reactions of photosynthesis. 
Figure C1.3.21 shows where the photolysis of water, synthesis of ATP by chemiosmosis and 
reduction of NADP occur in a thylakoid as part of the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis.
part of a chloroplast
thylakoid
space
chloroplast
membranes
granum
pigments, carriers
and enzymes of the
light-dependent 
stage
Photosystems I and II work in tandem – receiving light energy, releasing excited
electrons and replacing each lost electron by one in the ground state (photosystem II
electrons come from split water; photosystem I electrons from photosystem II).
Reduced NADP and ATP are required for CO2 ﬁxation in
the stroma. Though products of the light reaction (taking
place in the thylakoid membrane), they are actually formed
on the stromal side, where they are required.
photosystem II
LIGHT
hydrogen ions 
pumped across
membrane using
energy from
excited electrons
2 electrons
in excited
state
LIGHT
photosystem I
2 electrons
in excited
state
NADP+
H+ H+
reduced
NADP
ADP + Pi
ATP
ATP synthase
(ATPase)
stroma
H+ ions ﬂow
out through
channel in
ATPase
causing catalysis
of ATP formation
H2O
2H+ + 2e– +    O2
water-
splitting
passage of electron
via electron-carrier
molecules
ground-state
electron
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
passage of electron
via electron-carrier
molecules
thylakoid
space
hydrogen ions
energy for ATP
synthesis comes
from electrochemical
gradient in H+ ions
built up across
thylakoid membrane
thylakoid
compartment
thylakoid
membrane
stroma
lipid bilayer of ﬂuid
mosaic membrane
2e–
e– e– H+ H+
2e–
2e–
2
1
 
■Figure C1.3.21 The light-dependent reactions – the diagram shows the role of the electron transport 
chain and not the specific detail of each protein, which is not needed for IB Biology
Link
The adaptations 
of chloroplasts are 
covered in detail 
in Chapter A2.2, 
page 76.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.3   Photosynthesis
445
Common mistake
Make it clear whether you are referring to the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis or the 
light-dependent reactions. These processes are different and clarity is needed.
	ATL C1.3E 
The following site uses computer animations to show the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis:
https://vcell.science/project/photosynthesis
Use the animations and the information in this book to summarize in your own words the 
light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis. You may want to add annotated illustrations to 
help you explain the reactions. Note you do not need to know the names of the individual 
electron‑carrier proteins.
19	Compare 
and contrast 
photophos­
phorylation 
with oxidative 
phosphorylation.
Light-independent reactions
 
■Carbon fixation by rubisco
In the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis (Figure C1.3.22), carbon dioxide is converted to 
carbohydrate. The light-independent reactions are also known as the Calvin cycle (see 
Figure C1.3.22). The Calvin cycle requires the products of the light-dependent reactions. Carbon 
dioxide is combined with an acceptor molecule in the presence of a special enzyme, ribulose 
bisphosphate carboxylase (RuBisCo, or rubisco for short) in the stroma. The enzyme rubisco is 
probably the most abundant enzyme present on Earth and makes up the bulk of all the protein in a 
green plant. High concentrations of it are needed in the stroma of chloroplasts because it works 
relatively slowly and is not effective at low carbon dioxide concentrations. 
Ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP) is a 5-carbon sugar and carbon dioxide is added to it in a process known 
as fixation. After RuBP and carbon dioxide have combined, the 6-carbon product immediately splits 
into two 3-carbon molecules: glycerate 3-phosphate. Glycerate 3-phosphate is the first product of the 
fixation of carbon dioxide and so this is known as the fixation step (Figure C1.3.22).
Common mistake
Glycerate 3-phosphate is sometimes abbreviated to GP. This is discouraged as it is ambiguous in 
accounts of the Calvin cycle. It is recommended that you use the chemical’s full name.
 
■Synthesis of triose phosphate
Glycerate 3-phosphate is immediately reduced to the 3-carbon sugar phosphate, triose phosphate, 
using NADPH and ATP. Reduced NADP supplies the hydrogen to reduce glycerate 3-phosphate, and 
ATP supplies the necessary energy. This is the reduction step (see Figure C1.3.22).
Common mistake
Do not confuse triose phosphate with ATP; they are very different chemicals! The role of triose 
phosphate is often poorly understood. Make sure you learn the Calvin cycle carefully and know 
what each chemical does and how each chemical links with the next.
	
◆Calvin cycle: a cycle 
of reactions in the stroma 
of the chloroplast, also 
known as the light-
independent reactions, 
in which carbon 
dioxide is converted to 
carbohydrate.
	
◆Rubisco (RuBisCo): 
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate 
carboxylase is an enzyme 
involved in the first major 
step of carbon fixation; it 
is the central enzyme of 
photosynthesis.
Top tip!
You are expected to 
know the following 
details of the Calvin 
cycle: the names 
of the substrates 
RuBP and CO2, the 
enzyme rubisco and 
the product glycerate 
3-phosphate. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
446
C C C C C
carbon dioxide
ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP)
(5-carbon sugar phosphate,
carbon dioxide acceptor molecule)
triose phosphate
(3-carbon sugar)
input from the 
light-dependent
stage
glucose
and the other products
of photosynthesis
e.g. lipids
       amino acids
       carboxylic acids
RuBP
the acceptor molecule
used directly in
respiration or
converted to
two molecules of glycerate 3-phosphate
(3-carbon compound)
combines with
RuBP is
reused
regeneration
ATP
ATP
glycerate 3-phosphate combines with H from
NADPH using energy from from ATP      ADP
and forms
forming an unstable 6-carbon sugar
that splits immediately to form
H2O
released as
by-product
product synthesis
reduction
Calvin
cycle
fixation
+ CO2
C C C
C C C
+
 
■Figure C1.3.22 The path of carbon in photosynthesis – Calvin cycle
 
■Regeneration of RuBP
Some of the triose phosphate is metabolized to produce the molecule that first reacts with carbon 
dioxide (the acceptor molecule RuBP). This is the regeneration-of-acceptor step (see Figure C1.3.23). 
Five molecules of triose phosphate are converted to three molecules of RuBP, allowing the Calvin 
cycle to continue. The remaining triose phosphate can be used to synthesize other products, 
including glucose (see below). Because each turn of the cycle generates two molecules of triose 
phosphate, three turns are needed to produce six molecules of triose phosphate, allowing five to be 
converted to RuBP and one to be used in the formation of other molecules such as glucose.
Concept: Interdependence
Because the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis are a cycle, each intermediate 
depends on every other part of the metabolic pathway. Ultimately, molecules of triose 
phosphate must be converted back to RuBP so the cycle can continue.
Top tip!
You do not need to 
know details of the 
individual reactions of 
the Calvin cycle, but 
you should understand 
that five molecules of 
triose phosphate are 
converted to three 
molecules of RuBP, 
allowing the Calvin 
cycle to continue. 
Top tip!
If glucose is 
the product of 
photosynthesis, five-
sixths of all the triose 
phosphate produced 
must be converted 
back to RuBP so that 
the cycle can continue.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.3   Photosynthesis
447
Summary of the light-independent reactions
carbon
dioxide
NADP+
NADPH2
NADP+
NADPH + H+
reduction
ATP
ADP + Pi
triose phosphate
ATP
ADP + Pi
glycerate
3-phosphate
Rubisco
(CO2-fixation
enzyme)
ribulose
bisphosphate
regeneration
of acceptor
ADP + Pi
stroma
product synthesis
fixation
Calvin
cycle
granum
ATP
lipids amino
acids
sugars starch
lipids amino
acids
sugars starch
translocated to rest
of plant
chloroplast
products from the
light-dependent
reactions
 
■Figure C1.3.23 Summary of the light-independent reactions
Concept: Interaction
The reduced coenzyme NADPH interacts with glycerate 3-phosphate, reducing it to 
triose phosphate. In the process, NADPH is oxidized to NADP+.
20	List the 
carbohydrate 
intermediates of 
the Calvin cycle.
 
■Synthesis of other carbon compounds
The importance of photosynthesis to the green plant is that it provides the energy-rich glucose 
molecules from which the plant builds its other organic molecules. The metabolism of the 
green plant is sustained by the products of photosynthesis. Synthesis of carbohydrates, amino 
acids and other carbon compounds uses the products of the Calvin cycle and mineral nutrients 
(Figure C1.3.24). For example, triose phosphate can be further metabolized to produce 
carbohydrates such as sugars, sugar phosphates and starch, and later lipids, amino acids such as 
alanine, and organic acids such as malate. This is the product-synthesis step (see Figure C1.3.24).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Molecules
448
 
■Figure C1.3.24 The product-synthesis steps of photosynthesis
(Calvin cycle)
respiration pathway
(glycolysis + Krebs cycle)
formation of
essential metabolites
Key
photosynthesis
CO2
3-carbon phosphorylated sugar
(glycerate 3-phosphate)
acceptor molecule
(RuBP)
3-carbon phosphorylated sugar
(triose phosphate)
pyruvate
phosphorylated
6-carbon sugars
acetyl coenzyme A
glycerol
starch, cellulose
sucrose
glucose
fatty acids
carbohydrates
lipids
ion uptake
from soil
NO3–
NH3
glutamate
all other
amino acids
proteins
transamination
organic acids of
the Krebs cycle
α-ketoglutarate
Nature of science: Experiments
In the light-independent reactions, carbon dioxide is converted to carbohydrate in the stroma 
of the chloroplasts, surrounding the grana. The pathway by which carbon dioxide is reduced to 
glucose was first investigated by a team at the University of California, led by Melvin Calvin. He was 
awarded a Nobel Prize in 1961. The technique used radioactively labelled carbon dioxide (14CO2), 
which is taken up by the cells in exactly the same way as non-labelled carbon dioxide (12CO2) and 
then fixed into the same products of photosynthesis. Photosynthesizing cells from a culture of 
Chlorella (a unicellular alga) were used in the experiment, as they are easier to sample than, for 
example, mesophyll cells of a multicellular plant.
A brief pulse of labelled 14CO2 was introduced into the otherwise continuous supply of 12CO2 to 
photosynthesizing cells in the light and its progress monitored. Samples of the photosynthesizing 
cells, taken at frequent intervals after the 14CO2 had been fed, contained a sequence of radioactively 
labelled intermediates and (later) products of the photosynthetic pathway. These compounds were 
isolated by chromatography from the sampled cells and identified using autoradiography (a 
detection method that uses X-ray film to show molecules that are radioactively labelled). 
The chromatography and autoradiography techniques that the team exploited were relatively 
recent inventions then, and radioactive isotopes were only just becoming available for 
biochemical investigations.  
Find out more about Calvin’s experiments, and how sources of carbon-14 and autoradiography 
enabled Calvin and his team to elucidate the pathways of carbon fixation. 
Top tip!
Details of the metabolic 
pathways in Figure 
C1.3.24 are given to 
show the complexity 
of the reactions 
involved. They can 
be summarized by 
the understanding 
that all of the carbon 
in compounds in 
photosynthesizing 
organisms is fixed 
in the Calvin cycle, 
and that carbon 
compounds other than 
glucose are made by 
metabolic pathways 
that can be traced back 
to an intermediate in 
the cycle.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C1.3   Photosynthesis
449
	ATL C1.3F 
Review the Calvin cycle using this site:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2ZTumtpHrs
Review both light-dependent and light-independent reactions using this site:
https://media.hhmi.org/biointeractive/click/photosynthesis
21	Distinguish between the following:
a	 light-dependent reactions and light-independent reactions
b	 photolysis and photophosphorylation. 
22	Deduce the significant difference between the starting materials and the end 
products of photosynthesis.
Interdependence of the light-dependent 
and light-independent reactions
Concept: Interdependence
The light-dependent and light-independent reactions of photosynthesis are 
interdependent – one cannot function without the other. These reactions happen at 
the same time.
The light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis provide the NADPH and ATP, which in turn provide 
the electrons and energy needed to produce carbohydrates in the light-independent reactions. A lack 
of light therefore stops light-independent reactions as well because NADPH and ATP are not produced 
in the light-dependent reactions. These are needed for these light-independent reactions.
Cyanobacteria, algae and higher plants require carbon dioxide in solution, in the form of hydrogen 
carbonate ions (HCO3
−), for the optimal function of photosystem II. Carbon dioxide, in its ionic form 
hydrogen carbonate, has a regulating function in the splitting of water in photosynthesis. This means 
that carbon dioxide has an additional role to being reduced to glucose. Hydrogen carbonate acts as 
an acceptor for the protons that are produced when water is split in photosystem II. Carbon dioxide 
therefore acts both as a terminal electron acceptor at the very end of photosynthetic reactions and, at 
the same time, as a proton acceptor (HCO3
−) at the beginning of the reactions. 
Removal of hydrogen carbonate also slows electron transfer through the electron acceptors associated 
with photosystem II. This is because hydrogen carbonate is bound to proteins in photosystem II, 
which are needed for the activity of the electron transport chain. 
Depletion of carbon dioxide (and, therefore, hydrogen carbonate) not only causes cessation of carbon 
dioxide fixation, but also a strong decrease in the activity of photosystem II. 
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the consequences of photosynthesis for ecosystems?
2	 What are the functions of pigments in living organisms?
23	Explain how the 
light-independent 
reactions of 
photosynthesis 
rely on the 
light-dependent 
reactions.
