HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
450
C2.1
Chemical signalling
•	 How do cells distinguish between the many signals that they receive?
•	 What interactions occur inside animal cells in response to chemical signals?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C2.1.1 	 Receptors as proteins with binding sites for specific signalling chemicals 
(HL only)
	 C2.1.2 	 Cell signalling by bacteria in quorum sensing (HL only)
	 C2.1.3 	 Hormones, neurotransmitters, cytokines and calcium ions as examples of 
functional categories of signalling chemicals in animals (HL only)
	 C2.1.4 	 Chemical diversity of hormones and neurotransmitters (HL only)
	 C2.1.5 	 Localized and distant effects of signalling molecules (HL only)
	 C2.1.6 	 Differences between transmembrane receptors in a plasma membrane and 
intracellular receptors in the cytoplasm or nucleus (HL only)
	 C2.1.7 	 Initiation of signal transduction pathways by receptors (HL only)
	 C2.1.8 	 Transmembrane receptors for neurotransmitters and changes to membrane 
potential (HL only)
	 C2.1.9 	 Transmembrane proteins that activate G protein (HL only)
	 C2.1.10 	Mechanism of action of epinephrine (adrenaline) receptors (HL only)
	 C2.1.11 	Transmembrane receptors with tyrosine kinase activity (HL only)
	 C2.1.12 	Intracellular receptors that affect gene expression (HL only)
	 C2.1.13 	Effects of the hormones oestradiol and progesterone on target cells (HL only)
	 C2.1.14 	Regulation of cell signalling pathways by positive and negative feedback 
(HL only)
Receptors 
Cells in a multicellular organism (and even bacteria) must respond to environmental stimuli and 
communicate with each other to coordinate their activities. This is done by specific chemical 
signalling molecules known as ligands. These ligands include proteins, small peptides, amino acids, 
nucleotides, steroids, amines and even dissolved gases such as nitrogen monoxide (nitric oxide, NO). 
The cell chemical signalling process ensures that important activities occur in the correct cells, at 
the right time and in coordination with other cells in the organism. This usually involves a change in 
gene transcription, which often affects several genes simultaneously, but not necessarily all to the 
same extent. 
In most cases the ligand cannot cross the cell membrane and must bind with a receptor protein 
(Figure C2.1.1). Receptor proteins are unique to specific ligands. The specificity of the ligand–
receptor interaction allows a ligand to produce responses in specific target cells. Ligands can activate 
many different target cells simultaneously, which allows for the regulation and control of the cellular 
response. The binding process transmits a signal across the membrane and generates a second 
protein or messenger inside the cell. This can cause further changes within the cell, such as 
activation of an enzyme, which often occurs via phosphorylation (addition of phosphate groups).  
	
◆Ligand: general term 
for a molecule that binds 
to a specific site on a 
protein.
	
◆Chemical signalling: 
the release of chemicals 
(ligands) that bind to a 
specific molecule which 
delivers a signal within 
the cell or to another cell.
	
◆Receptor protein: 
protein that recognizes 
and binds with a specific 
chemical signal molecule 
on the outside of the 
plasma membrane.
Top tip!
You should use the 
term ‘ligand’ for 
chemical signalling 
molecules.
1	 Define the term 
ligand.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
451
In some cases, the messenger may enter the nucleus (via the nuclear pores) and change transcription 
(copying of the genetic code on to messenger RNA). These processes are examples of 
signal transduction.
Common mistake
Do not confuse ‘receptor protein’ with the term ‘receptor’. Receptors are specialized cells that 
receive stimuli, and change (transduce) this signal into an electrical impulse (see Chapter C2.2). 
Receptor proteins are molecules that bind with ligands to convey messages into a cell, stimulating 
specific metabolic reactions.
 
■Figure C2.1.1 Outline of 
cellular chemical signalling 
(signal transduction) 

Receptor protein
for attachment
of specific chemical
signalling molecule
– a signal is then generated 
that is transmitted inside the
cell
signal
receptor
protein
message
 
A chemical signalling pathway has one or more critical functions:
l	 Relay (‘pass on’) the signal onward and help spread it through the cell. 
l	 Amplify the signal received (via a second messenger), making it stronger, so that a small 
number of ligands are enough to produce a large intracellular response. One ligand can activate 
many signal transduction pathways to trigger many cell reactions simultaneously.
l	 Detect signals from more than one intracellular chemical signalling pathway and integrate them 
(two or more signals become one signal) before relaying a signal onward. 
l	 Distribute the signal to more than one effector protein, creating branches and resulting in a 
complex response (Figure C2.1.2). 
Primary transduction is when the ‘message’ converts from being extracellular (outside the cell) 
to intracellular (inside the cell). The scaffold protein holds some proteins close together, so the 
reaction is faster.
The same signal molecule can trigger different cellular responses in two different cells in the body. 
Because different types of differentiated cells activate different sets of genes, different kinds of cells 
have different collections of proteins.
Concept: Interdependence
Chemical signalling relies on many different molecules to pass along the signal, 
all needing to work together to control cell metabolism and keep the organism 
working properly.
2	 Suggest why 
chemical signalling 
in multicellular 
organisms is more 
complicated than 
in single-celled 
organisms, such 
as yeast.
	ATL C2.1A 
Before learning more about cell signalling in this chapter, find out about this topic yourself by 
watching the animation at this website: https://dnalc.cshl.edu/resources/3d/cellsignals.html
The animation shows how a fibroblast cell responds to external signals after an injury. 
What knowledge of biology already covered in the course does this topic draw on? What aspects 
of cell structure, cell membranes and proteins do you need to know about to understand how 
cells respond to external chemical signals?
	
◆Signal transduction: 
the conversion of an 
impulse or stimulus from 
one physical or chemical 
form to another. In cell 
biology, the process by 
which a cell responds to 
an extracellular signal. 
	
◆Second messenger: 
small intracellular ligand 
(signalling molecule) 
generated or released 
inside a cell in response to 
an extracellular signal.
	
◆Effector protein: 
proteins that cause a 
change inside a cell 
during signalling.
	
◆Scaffold protein: 
protein that binds two 
or more other proteins, 
and organizes binding 
partners into a functional 
unit to enhance signalling 
efficiency.
Link
Transcription is 
covered in detail 
in Chapter D1.2, 
page 615.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
452
receptor protein
EXTRACELLULAR
CYTOPLASM
scaffold
protein
integrator
protein
modulator
protein
nuclear
envelope
target protein
target
gene
DNA
RNA
gene
transcription
NUCLEUS
amplifier and
transducer protein
relay
proteins
adaptor
protein
anchoring
protein
cytoskeleton
messenger
protein
second messenger
ligand
 
■Figure C2.1.2 Intracellular signalling proteins can relay, amplify, integrate and distribute the 
incoming signal
Cell signalling by bacteria in quorum sensing
In the early days of microbiology, bacteria were considered non-social organisms that led individual 
lifestyles with little interaction. However, recent research has shown that many strains of bacteria 
communicate with each other by emitting, detecting and responding to ligands. One important, 
well-studied method of intercellular communication, known as quorum sensing (Figure C2.1.3), allows 
bacteria to turn on genes together in response to increases in the density of cells in the population. 
Quorum sensing relies on the bacteria producing and releasing signal molecules that diffuse 
outwards from the bacterium. This allows the bacteria population to communicate with each other 
and coordinate their behaviour when a certain population size is reached. 
 
■Figure C2.1.3 Bacterial 
quorum sensing
low cell density
high cell density
individual behaviours
group behaviours
signal
molecules
bacteria
	
◆Quorum sensing: 
the ability of some 
bacteria to monitor cell 
density and to adjust their 
gene expression.
Top tip!
The size of the 
‘quorum’ is not fixed 
but depends on the 
rate of production 
and loss of the 
signal molecules. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
453
Quorum sensing signalling molecules are often known as autoinducers. These are detected by 
specific proteins inside the cell or in the bacterial cell membrane. When the autoinducer binds to the 
receptor, it activates or represses transcription of target genes, which often include those for 
autoinducer synthesis.
When the bacterial population is low, diffusion reduces the concentration of the autoinducer in the 
surroundings to a very low value. As the population increases, the concentration of the autoinducer 
reaches a threshold, gene expression occurs and more autoinducer is synthesized. This forms a 
positive feedback loop for autoinducer production.
Link
Positive feedback loops are covered later in this chapter, page 465, in fruit ripening in 
Chapter C3.1, page 516, and in hormonal control of pregnancy in Chapter D3.1, page 722.
A well-known example of quorum sensing is shown by the bioluminescent marine bacterium Vibrio 
fischeri, which produces the light-emitting enzyme luciferase when it reaches a critical cell population 
density in the light organ of its host, the squid (Figure C2.1.4). It is of little benefit to V. fischeri to 
produce luciferase when it is on its own as a single cell. The bacteria do not emit light when they are 
outside of the host. The bioluminescence is very energy intensive and so the bacteria benefits from 
being located within the animal where it can obtain nutrients. The squid also benefits from having 
the bacteria: the light the bacteria emit attracts prey or can be used as camouflage. This interaction is 
known as mutualism.
Going further
Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disorder. The most common symptoms are difficulty in 
breathing and excessive mucus production. This is due to frequent lung infections often 
involving large colonies of the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which are resistant 
to antibiotics because they produce enzymes and a biofilm when the cell density 
exceeds a critical value detected by quorum sensing. A biofilm is a complex aggregation 
of micro-organisms marked by the excretion of a protective and adhesive extracellular 
matrix. The production of the biofilm provides the organism with protection against 
antibiotics and the enzymes damage the lung epithelium. 
Signalling chemicals in animals
In animals, many ligands may be classified as hormones, neurotransmitters, cytokines or calcium ions.
 
■Hormones
Hormones are secreted by endocrine glands and are carried through the circulatory system to act 
on distant target cells. Hormones act over a longer time, work in cell metabolism and other functions 
e.g. sexual reproduction. Hormones are discussed further later in this chapter on page 454.
 
■Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters carry signals between neurons or from neurons to other types of target cells 
(such as muscle cells). The release of neurotransmitters is caused by the arrival of an action potential 
at the end of a neuron. Neurotransmitters are discussed further later in this chapter on page 455.
	
◆Hormone: extracellular signal molecule that is secreted and transported via the bloodstream (in 
animals) or the sap (in plants) to target tissues where it causes a specific effect.
	
◆Neurotransmitter: chemical released at the presynaptic membrane of an axon when an action 
potential arrives, which transmits the action potential across the synapse.
	
◆Autoinducers: a 
signalling molecule 
produced and used by 
bacteria participating in 
quorum sensing.
Link
Mutualism as 
an interspecific 
relationship is covered 
in Chapter C4.1, 
page 565.
 
■Figure C2.1.4 Image 
of the Hawaiian 
bobtail squid showing 
bioluminescence produced 
by Vibrio fischeri
3	 Outline the role 
of quorum sensing 
in bacteria.
4	 Define the term 
hormone.
Link
Neurotransmitters 
are also covered 
in Chapter C2.2, 
page 476; human 
hormones are covered 
in Chapter D3.1, 
page 693 and D3.3, 
page 760. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
454
 
■Cytokines
The cytokines form a family of relatively small, secreted proteins that control many aspects of 
growth and differentiation of specific types of cells. Some cytokines, such as a-interferon, are 
produced and secreted by many types of cells after infection with viruses.
 
■Calcium ions
Most ligands are organic, but some metal ions are involved in cells signalling, especially calcium 
ions (Ca2+ (aq)). Many ligands in animals, including neurotransmitters, growth factors and some 
hormones, induce responses in their target cells via signal transduction pathways that increase the 
concentration of Ca2+ (aq) in the cytoplasm.
Increasing the cytoplasmic concentration of Ca2+ (aq) causes a number of responses in animal 
cells, including muscle cell contraction, secretion of substances (for example, the neurotransmitter 
acetylcholine) and cell division. 
Although cells always contain calcium ions, this ion can function as a second messenger because its 
concentration in the cytoplasm is normally much lower than the concentration outside the cell. 
Chemical diversity of hormones 
and neurotransmitters
A wide range of extracellular molecules and ions can act as ligands for receptor proteins in cell 
signalling pathways. They include metal ions, low molar mass compounds (for example, amino acids 
and molecules derived from them), steroids, peptides and proteins. 
 
■Hormones
There are three main classes of hormone (Table C2.1.1): proteins (such as insulin), amines (also 
known as amino acid derivatives, such as epinephrine) and steroids (such as cholesterol, which is 
needed to synthesize oestradiol and testosterone). Hormones can be small, non-polar, hydrophobic 
molecules that diffuse through the cell membrane to reach receptors in the nucleus or cytoplasm. 
Examples are progesterone and testosterone, as well as thyroid hormones. 
 
■Table C2.1.1 Three main chemical classes of hormones
Hormone 
class
Protein/peptide 
hormones
Steroid hormones
Amine hormones
Example
Insulin
Phe
Val
Asn
Gln
His
Leu
Cys
Gly
Ser
His
Leu
Val
Glu
Ala
Leu
Tyr
Leu
Val
Cys
S
S
S
S
S
S
Gly
COOH
COOH
H2N
H2N
Glu
Arg
Gly
Asn Cys
Tyr
Asn
Glu
Leu
Gln
Tyr
Leu
Ser
Cys
lle
Ser
Thr
Cys
Cys
Gln
Glu
Val
lle
Gly
Phe
Tyr
Thr
Pro
Lys
Thr
Phe
Oestradiol
CH3
OH
HO
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
HO
HO
H
N
OH
CH3
Hormones can also be water-soluble molecules that bind to receptors on the plasma membrane. 
They are either proteins like insulin and glucagon, or small, charged molecules like histamine 
and epinephrine.
	
◆Cytokines: small 
signalling molecules 
(usually a protein or 
glycoprotein) made and 
secreted by cells that act 
on neighbouring cells to 
alter their behaviour.
Top tip!
Note that some 
neurotransmitters 
can also act as 
hormones. For 
example, epinephrine 
(adrenaline) 
functions both as 
a neurotransmitter 
and as a hormone 
produced by the 
adrenal gland to signal 
glycogen breakdown in 
muscle cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
455
 
■Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters are a chemically diverse group of chemicals, including simple amines (for 
example, dopamine), amino acids (for example, gamma-aminobutyric acid or GABA), polypeptides 
(for example, endorphins) and acetylcholine (an amino acid derivative).
Although some neurons produce and release only one kind of neurotransmitter, most make 
two or more and may release one or more at any given time. The coexistence of more than one 
neurotransmitter in the synapse makes it possible for the cell to exert several influences at the 
same time.
In the brain and other parts of the central nervous system, the gas nitric oxide (NO) functions as a 
neurotransmitter, or as an agent that influences neurotransmitters.
Concept: Interaction
Neurotransmitters interact with the synapse to convey messages through the body. 
Several neurotransmitters in the same synapse allow a number of messages to be passed 
on at the same time, and so allow varied responses to stimuli.
Going further
Nitric oxide and cell signalling
Nitric oxide (nitrogen monoxide, NO) gas molecules can rapidly diffuse across the 
plasma membrane into the cytoplasm of target cells and directly control the activity of 
specific intracellular proteins. Nitric oxide is synthesized from the amino acid arginine 
and diffuses from its site of synthesis into nearby cells. The gas only acts locally because 
it is quickly converted to a range of products by reacting with oxygen and water 
outside cells. 
Nitric oxide causes the smooth muscle in blood vessels to relax, causing the blood 
vessel to dilate (widen), increasing blood flow. Many nerve cells also use NO to signal 
neighbouring cells.
Localized and distant effects 
of signalling molecules
Cells in multicellular organisms usually communicate via ligands targeted for cells that may be either 
adjacent (local chemical signalling) or not adjacent (long-distance chemical signalling).
 
■Local chemical signalling
Local signalling involves direct contact between cells. Neurons are separated by synapses. Synaptic 
signalling occurs across chemical synapses and involves neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine 
and norepinephrine. The gap between the presynaptic membrane and the postsynaptic membrane is 
very small, between 20 and 40 nanometres (nm). Neurotransmitters therefore only have to transfer 
the signal over a small distance. While the immediate effect of the neurotransmitter is localized, the 
overall effect is widespread because the signal transmitted across the synapse enables an electrical 
impulse to be established in the postsynaptic neuron and the message is transferred on through 
the body.
	
◆Synaptic signalling: 
a type of cell–cell 
communication that 
occurs across chemical 
synapses in the 
nervous system.
Link
Neurons and synapses 
are covered in detail 
in Chapter C2.2, 
page 467.
Nature 
of science: 
Experiments
Evidence for the role 
of nitric oxide (NO) in 
causing the relaxation 
of smooth muscle 
came from a set of 
experiments in which 
the neurotransmitter 
acetylcholine was 
added to experimental 
preparations of 
the smooth muscle 
cells that surround 
blood vessels. The 
direct application of 
acetylcholine to these 
cells caused them to 
contract, the expected 
effect of acetylcholine 
on these muscle cells. 
However, addition 
of acetylcholine to 
the lumen of small, 
isolated blood vessels 
in culture medium 
caused the underlying 
smooth muscles to 
relax, not contract. 
Later studies showed 
that, in response to 
acetylcholine, the 
endothelial cells that 
line the lumen of blood 
vessels were releasing 
a substance (later 
shown to be NO) that 
triggered muscle cell 
relaxation. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
456
One of the main neurotransmitters in the human body is acetylcholine. On reaching the postsynaptic 
membrane, acetylcholine binds with the neurotransmitter receptors (ligand-gated sodium channels) 
found on the postsynaptic membrane, causing the opening of ion channels. This results in the influx 
of sodium ions, Na+ (aq), which generates a new impulse in the postsynaptic neuron. 
Other examples of local chemical signalling include gap junctions in animals and plasmodesmata in 
plants. In animals, cells may communicate between membrane-bound molecules on the cell surface 
membrane (cell–cell recognition).
Link
Gap junctions are discussed in Chapter B2.1, page 243. Plasmodesmata are discussed in 
Chapter B3.2, page 306.
 
■Long-distance chemical signalling
For long-distance signalling, hormones are secreted into the transport system (for example, the 
blood plasma of an animal or the sap of a plant) to act on distant target cells. In animals with a 
closed circulation system (i.e. heart, arteries, veins and capillaries – see Figure B3.2.22, page 315), 
hormones are transported in the blood, and so can travel throughout the body to receptors that are 
very far away from the source. The hormones are specific to receptor proteins either in the plasma 
membrane or within the cell (see below). The hormones trigger a cascade of reactions, which leads to 
the target cell altering its metabolism to respond to the signal.
Specialized animal cells release hormone molecules (for example, insulin and glucagon) into blood 
vessels of the circulatory system to other parts of the body, where they reach target cells that can 
recognize and respond to the hormones. This is known as endocrine signalling. 
Plant hormones (for example, auxin, a growth hormone) sometimes travel in the vascular tissue but 
often reach their targets by moving through cells or by diffusion through the air as a gas. 
Differences between transmembrane 
and intracellular receptors 
Receptor proteins can either be in the plasma membrane (transmembrane) or within the cytoplasm 
(intracellular) (see Figure C2.1.5). The properties of a ligand determine the type of receptor that is 
used. Some ligands are non-polar and therefore lipid-soluble, whereas others are charged and water-
soluble. Non-polar ligands can diffuse through the phospholipid bilayer and access receptor proteins 
within the cell. Polar ligands, such as peptide hormones (e.g. insulin and glucagon) are hydrophilic 
and cannot pass through the phospholipid bilayer. These ligands must bind with receptor proteins 
on the surface of the cell.
a lipid-insoluble ligand
secondary messengers
receptor
protein
target cell
product
activated enzyme
or other protein
b lipid-soluble ligand
receptor
protein
target cell
protein
synthesis
DNA
mRNA
nucleus
ligand–receptor
complex
	
◆Ligand-gated 
channel: an ion channel 
that is stimulated to 
open by the binding of a 
small molecule such as a 
neurotransmitter.
	
◆Ion channel: 
transmembrane protein 
that forms a pore across 
the bilayer through 
which specific ions 
can diffuse down their 
concentration gradients.
Top tip!
Neurons releasing 
acetylcholine 
are described as 
cholinergic neurons, 
while those releasing 
norepinephrine are 
described as adrenergic 
neurons. 
Link
The endocrine system 
is covered in Chapter 
C3.1, page 493.
Top tip!
The same ligand can 
bind to different 
receptor proteins 
causing different 
responses (for example, 
acetylcholine). On 
the other hand, 
different ligands 
binding to different 
receptor proteins can 
produce the same 
cellular response (for 
example, glucagon and 
epinephrine). 
 
■Figure C2.1.5 Lipid-
insoluble ligands utilize 
receptor proteins in 
the plasma membrane, 
whereas lipid-soluble 
ligands can diffuse 
through the membrane 
and access intracellular 
protein receptors


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
457
Common mistake
It is incorrect to say that all receptor proteins are in the plasma membrane. The receptors on the 
surface of the cell respond to charged, polar ligands. Ligands that are lipid soluble, such as steroid 
hormones, can pass through the phospholipid bilayer and so their receptors are inside the cell.
Corresponding to the two classes of signal molecules there are, therefore, two classes of receptor 
proteins: transmembrane receptor proteins and intracellular receptor proteins. 
 
■Transmembrane receptor proteins
In Chapter B1.2, we saw how R-groups determine the properties of assembled polypeptides. 
R-groups are hydrophobic or hydrophilic, with hydrophilic R-groups being polar or charged, acidic 
or basic. Transmembrane receptor proteins have three different regions: a ligand-binding region, a 
hydrophobic region extending through the membrane, and an intracellular region that transmits 
the signal to the inside of the cell. Integral proteins, including receptor proteins, have regions with 
hydrophobic amino acids, helping them to embed in membranes. Hydrophilic regions of the receptor 
proteins are towards the outside of the membrane where the phosphate heads of the phospholipids 
are located. Hydrophilic ligands bind to the hydrophilic region of the receptor protein.
In most cases, ligands bind to a receptor in the plasma membrane of the responding cell. This 
interaction produces a change in the shape of the receptor that causes the signal to be relayed across 
the membrane to the receptor’s cytoplasm. This is the process of cell transduction.
There are many different receptors in the plasma membrane of cells and they can be classified into a 
small number of structural classes. They are covered later in this chapter.
Nature of science: Experiments
Identification of cell-surface receptors
Hormone receptors are difficult to identify and purify (usually with chromatography) because they 
are present in very low numbers, and they have to be solubilized with non-ionic detergents. Because 
of their high specificity and high affinity for binding with their ligands, the presence of a certain 
receptor in a cell can be detected and quantified by measuring their binding to radioactively labelled 
hormones. The binding of the hormone to a cell suspension increases with hormone concentration 
until it reaches receptor saturation. Specific binding is obtained by measuring both the total and the 
non-specific binding (which is obtained by using a large excess of unlabelled hormone). 
 
■Intracellular receptor proteins
Many lipid-soluble ligands diffuse across the plasma membrane, diffuse into the nucleus, bind to the 
DNA and initiate specific protein synthesis, which then initiates reactions (Figure C2.1.6). Steroid 
hormones such as oestradiol, progesterone and testosterone are examples of this type of ligand.
Steroid receptors
Steroid receptors are not present in the membrane but are normally present as soluble proteins in the 
cytoplasm. Since steroid hormones are lipid soluble, they diffuse from the bloodstream across the 
hydrophobic plasma membrane into the cytoplasm of cells.  If the cell is a target cell, the hormone 
binds to a receptor molecule, which may be present in the cytoplasm or may be within the nucleus. 
If the receptor is in the cytoplasm, it moves to the nucleus by simple diffusion. In either case, if the 
receptor molecule is activated, it acts as transcription factor by binding to specific regions of DNA in 
the chromosomes (see Chapters D1.1 and D1.2).
	
◆Transmembrane 
receptor protein: cell 
signalling receptor protein 
that is in the membrane.
	
◆Intracellular 
receptor protein: cell 
signalling receptor protein 
located inside the cell.
Top tip!
The number of cell-
surface receptors 
may be regulated by 
endocytosis to reduce 
their number. They 
may also be inactivated 
by phosphorylation.
Top tip!
Ion channels are 
necessary to transport 
ions into and out of 
a cell because ions 
are charged particles 
(surrounded by polar 
water molecules) 
and therefore cannot 
diffuse across the 
hydrophobic interior of 
the plasma membrane. 
Link
Transcription is 
covered in Chapter 
D1.2, page 615 and 
genes are covered 
in Chapter D2.2, 
page 670.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
458
Depending on a hormone’s mode of action, transcription 
of a gene may be switched on or switched off. If a gene 
has been activated, new RNA is formed, leaves the 
nucleus and then directs the formation of new proteins 
(most likely an enzyme) at ribosomes. The new protein 
or enzyme will bring about a structural or functional 
change in the cell. Of course, if a gene is switched off by 
hormone action, some cell process will be interrupted 
or terminated.
Initiation of signal 
transduction pathways 
by receptors 
For a cell to respond when it encounters a signal, the 
ligand must first be recognized by a specific receptor 
molecule on the plasma membrane and then transmitted 
to the cell’s interior before a cellular response can occur.
Cell signalling can be divided into three stages: 
1	 Ligand–receptor interaction 
2	 Signal transduction 
3	 Cellular response.
5	 Compare 
and contrast 
transmembrane 
and intracellular 
receptor proteins.
structure/
function
of cell
altered
moves through
membrane by diffusion
steroid
receptor
in cytoplasm
gene
activated
to yield
mRNA
mRNA to
ribosomes in
cytoplasm
activated
enzyme
steroid 
hormone
blood in
capillary
 
■Figure C2.1.6 The mechanism of 
action of a lipid-soluble hormone
 
■1 Ligand–receptor interaction
The ligand is complementary in shape to a binding site on the receptor and binds to it. There is 
high specificity in the ligand–receptor binding. The binding of the ligand to the receptor activates 
the receptor. 
 
■2 Signal transduction
The signal transduction pathway often requires a sequence of changes in a series of different 
molecules in a multistep pathway. These molecules in the pathway are often called relay molecules. 
Signal transduction occurs via two main ways:  protein phosphorylation in a phosphorylation signal 
cascade and the release of second messengers, for example cyclic AMP (see Figures C2.1.2 and 
C2.1.13). Such pathways also allow for signal amplification. 
The activated receptor activates a relay molecule, which activates another relay molecule, and so 
on, until the molecule (usually a protein) that produces the final cellular response is activated. 
Many of the relay molecules in signal transduction pathways are protein kinases and they often 
act on other protein kinases in the pathway. Each activated protein kinase will initiate a sequential 
phosphorylation and activation of other kinases, resulting in a phosphorylation cascade. 
Relay molecules are usually activated when they are phosphorylated, and deactivated when they 
are dephosphorylated. The processes of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation act as a molecular 
switch in the cell, turning metabolic activities on and off as required.
 
■3 Cellular response
The signal transduction pathway leads to a specific cellular response, which is the regulation of one 
or more cellular activities. The response may occur in the nucleus or the cytoplasm of a cell. 
	
◆Signal cascade: series 
of linked reactions, often 
including phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation, 
that carries information 
within a cell, often 
amplifying an initial signal.
	
◆Phosphorylation 
cascade: a sequence 
of events where one 
protein kinase enzyme 
phosphorylates another, 
causing a sequence of 
events that leads to the 
phosphorylation of many 
protein kinases. As the 
signal is carried onwards 
it is amplified and 
sometimes can spread to 
other signalling pathways.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
459
Depending on the type of cell and ligand, some cellular responses may include: 
l	 regulation of activity of protein (for example, the opening or closing of an ion channel in the 
plasma membrane changes the membrane permeability)
l	 regulation of protein synthesis by activating or deactivating specific gene expression by turning 
genes on or off in the nucleus
l	 regulation of the activity of an enzyme
l	 rearrangement of the cytoskeleton of the cell
l	 death of the cell (for example, apoptosis).
After the specific cellular response has occurred, the signal is terminated. The ability of a cell to 
receive new ligands depends on the reversibility of the changes produced by previous signals. 
Transmembrane receptors for neurotransmitters 
and changes to membrane potential
The ligand-gated sodium ion channel (Figure C2.1.7) is composed of five transmembrane protein 
subunits. The protein subunits combine to form an aqueous pore across the lipid bilayer, which 
is lined by five transmembrane a-helices, one from each subunit. There are two acetylcholine 
binding sites. 
nicotinic receptor
ACh
Na+
When acetylcholine released by a motor neuron binds to both acetylcholine binding sites, the 
channel undergoes a change in conformation (shape): the hydrophobic side chains move apart and 
the gate opens, allowing sodium ions to flow across the membrane down their electrochemical 
and concentration gradient. This depolarizes the plasma membrane (Figure C2.2.4, page 471) and 
changes the membrane potential (the voltage across the membrane), which leads to other changes 
(see Chapter C2.2, page 467).
Transmembrane receptors 
that activate G protein 
GTP is an energy-rich nucleotide like ATP, composed of ribose and three phosphate groups but with 
guanine rather than adenine as the base. G proteins are membrane-bound GTP binding proteins, 
usually activated by the binding of a hormone or other ligand to a transmembrane receptor. They 
respond to extracellular signals from hormones and neurotransmitters, and trigger intracellular 
signalling cascades that regulate bodily functions.
G proteins are important in vision, as well as smell and taste. Their role is to couple the primary 
stimuli (the light waves, odorants (molecules that cause smell) or flavourants (molecules that cause 
	
◆Apoptosis: a form of 
programmed cell death 
that allows cells that are 
unneeded or unwanted 
to be eliminated from 
an adult or developing 
organism.
Link
The role of sodium 
ion channels is 
discussed in Chapter 
B2.1, page 239 and 
their role in changing 
membrane potential 
is covered in C2.2, 
page 479.
 
■Figure C2.1.7 The open and closed conformations of the 
acetylcholine receptor (ligand-gated sodium channels)
	
◆GTP: guanosine 
triphosphate with a role 
in cell signalling.
	
◆G protein: a 
membrane-bound 
GTP binding protein, 
usually activated by the 
binding of a hormone 
or other ligand to a 
transmembrane receptor.
Going further
Curare
Curare (a plant 
alkaloid) causes 
muscle paralysis by 
blocking excitatory 
acetylcholine 
receptors at the 
neuromuscular 
junction. It is used 
by surgeons to relax 
muscles during 
an operation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
460
flavour) to ion channels. Changes in ion flow through these channels lead to the production of a 
nerve impulse that flows from the sensory organ (such as the eye or nose) to the brain. 
The G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) is closely associated with a G protein, a protein that binds 
to guanosine triphosphate or guanosine diphosphate (GDP). 
G protein-coupled receptors have a common structure consisting of seven hydrophobic a-helices that 
span the plasma membrane (Figure C2.1.8). By forming hydrophobic interactions with the hydrophobic 
core of the membrane lipid bilayer, the a-helices allow the receptor membrane to be embedded within 
the plasma membrane. Signal transduction from GPCRs is controlled by G proteins that bind mainly to 
the third and largest cytoplasmic loop in the polypeptide chain of the receptor.
transmembrane α-helix
loop
NH2
COOH
The GPCR is inactive when not bound to a ligand. The G protein is inactive when bound to GDP. 
When the ligand binds to the extracellular side of GPCR, the receptor is activated, causing it to 
change its conformation. The change in conformation (shape) of the receptor when the ligand binds 
activates a G protein, which in turn activates an effector protein that generates a second messenger, 
causing the G protein to exchange its bound GDP for GTP.
The G protein is activated and dissociates from the receptor, then binds to an enzyme or other 
protein, activating it. Once activated, the enzyme triggers signal transduction leading to cellular 
response. Once the signal molecule is absent, GTP is hydrolyzed back into GDP by the GTPase 
enzyme found in the G protein subunit. The G protein therefore dissociates from the enzyme and 
returns to its inactive form. The signal is switched off (Figure C2.1.9).
GDP
GTP
G-protein subunits or second
messengers modulate ion channels
G-protein
receptor
ligand
membrane-bound
effector protein
ions
ion channel
GTP
second
messengers
activated G-protein
GDP
GTP
Top tip!
GPCRs are only found 
in eukaryotes, not 
prokaryotes. There are 
nearly 1000 GPCRs and 
many different signal 
molecules are specific 
for different types of 
GPCRs. These receptors 
vary in their binding 
sites for recognizing 
signal molecules and 
different G proteins 
inside the cell. 
 
■Figure C2.1.8 A G protein-coupled receptor
	
◆GTPase: an enzyme 
that hydrolyzes GTP into 
GDP and Pi.
 
■Figure C2.1.9 
Mechanism of action 
of G protein-coupled 
receptors; GDP is 
dislodged when GTP 
interacts with G protein
	
◆G protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR): 
cell-surface receptor that 
associates with a G protein.
Top tip!
Proteins fold in water 
(a polar solvent) so 
that hydrophobic 
groups are buried 
and polar groups are 
exposed to the water 
molecules. However, 
proteins arrange 
themselves differently 
in the bilayer of the 
plasma membrane 
as it is a highly non-
polar environment; 
they expose their 
hydrophobic groups 
and hide polar groups 
in their core.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
461
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Physical molecular modelling
Make a paper model of a G protein-coupled receptor using this site:  
https://pdb101.rcsb.org/learn/paper-models/g-protein-coupled-receptor-gpcr
The site provides a template PDF to download and print. How does the structure of the 
protein enable it to carry out its function? Use your model to explain to someone else in 
your class how the G protein-coupled receptor functions.
Mechanism of action of epinephrine 
(adrenaline) receptors 
The adrenal glands release the hormone epinephrine (adrenaline), which circulates in the 
bloodstream. It binds to a class of GPCRs (see page 460) known as adrenergic receptors, which are 
present on many types of cells. Epinephrine prepares the body for vigorous activity. It increases heart 
and breathing rate, enabling increased levels of oxygen and glucose to be delivered to muscle cells 
for respiration. The action of an anaesthetic can be lengthened considerably if it is administered as a 
drug along with epinephrine. Because epinephrine is a vasoconstrictor, it reduces the blood supply, 
allowing the drug to remain at its targeted site for a longer period.
Epinephrine acts as a peptide hormone. Peptide hormone receptors activate a cascade, mediated by a 
second messenger inside the cell. Second messengers are small, non-protein, water-soluble molecules 
or ions that relay signals received at receptor proteins on the cell surface to target molecules in the 
cytoplasm or nucleus. Being small and water-soluble, they can readily diffuse throughout the cell. 
Second messengers serve to greatly amplify the strength of the signal. The most common second 
messengers are cyclic AMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate) and calcium ions, Ca2+ (aq) 
(Figure C2.1.10). Second messengers participate in pathways initiated by G protein-coupled receptors 
and receptor tyrosine kinases (see page 463). 
structure/
function
of cell
altered
epinephrine does
not enter cell
binds to receptor
in cell surface membrane
ATP
ATP
cyclic AMP (cAMP) 
second messenger
cyclic AMP
activated
enzyme
existing
(inactive)
protein
cAMP eventually
inactivated
cell surface
membrane
epinephrine
activated enzyme
system in liver cell
glycogen
glucose
liver cell
G-protein
adenylyl
cyclase
receptor
epinephrine
blood supply
to liver
 
■Figure C2.1.10 The cell signalling pathway, involving epinephrine, 
stimulating glycogen breakdown in skeletal muscle cells
Link
Epinephrine secretion 
is covered further 
in Chapter C3.1, 
page 503.
	
◆Cyclic AMP (cAMP): 
small intracellular 
signalling molecule 
generated from ATP in 
response to hormonal 
stimulation of cell-surface 
receptors.
6	 Suggest how 
the same second 
messenger (for 
example, cAMP) 
is used in many 
different cells, 
but the response 
to the same 
second messenger 
is different in 
each cell.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
462
An enzyme embedded in the cell surface membrane, adenylyl cyclase/adenylate cyclase, when 
activated by the G protein, can catalyse the conversion of ATP to many cyclic AMP (cAMP) 
molecules. The concentration in the cytoplasm of the cAMP is increased very rapidly, amplifying 
the signal in the cytoplasm. It does not last for long because another enzyme, called 
phosphodiesterase, converts the cAMP to AMP, resulting in signal termination. 
The hormone activates a GPCR, which turns on a G protein (GS) that activates adenylyl cyclase 
to boost the production of cAMP. The increase in cAMP activates PKA (cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase), which phosphorylates and activates an enzyme called phosphorylase kinase, which activates 
glycogen phosphorylase, the enzyme that breaks down glycogen. 
In skeletal muscle, epinephrine increases the concentration of intracellular cyclic AMP, causing the 
breakdown of glycogen by activating PKA, which leads to both the activation of an enzyme that 
promotes glycogen breakdown and the inhibition of the enzyme that catalyses glycogen synthesis 
(Figure C2.1.11). 
By stimulating glycogen breakdown and inhibiting its synthesis, the increase in cyclic AMP 
maximizes the amount of glucose available as a respiratory substrate for muscular activity. 
Epinephrine also acts on adipose cells, stimulating the breakdown of fat to fatty acids, which can 
also be used to generate ATP by respiration.
The relay molecules are activated kinases and phosphorylases. These proteins catalyse specific types 
of reactions:
l	 Kinases are enzymes that transfer a phosphate group from ATP to an acceptor.
l	 Phosphorylases are enzymes that break down glucose-based polysaccharides (e.g. glycogen) to 
glucose 1-phosphate.
The critical role of the second and third stages of signal transduction is the amplification of the 
hormone signal (see page 458). So, from one activated receptor molecule, 10 000 (104) molecules 
of cAMP are formed. As a result of the presence of cAMP in the cytoplasm, approximately 106 
molecules of active phosphorylase enzyme will be formed, and these will then trigger the formation 
of perhaps 108 molecules of glucose 1-phosphate. 
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour 
The IUPAC chemical name of epinephrine is (R)-1-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-2-methylaminoethanol. In 
Japan and the USA, the substance is known as epinephrine, but in most other countries it is known 
as adrenaline. Adrenaline is marketed in Britain as ‘Epipen’ for intramuscular injection and as Eppy 
or Simplene for eyedrops. 
George Oliver, a medical doctor, and Edward Schäfer, a professor of physiology, both in the UK, 
showed that the adrenal glands contained a substance with strong pharmacological effects. It was 
named ‘epinephrine’ by John Abel in the USA in 1897. 
In 1901, after visiting Abel, Jokichi Takamine, a Japanese chemist, prepared a pure extract of the 
active principle from the adrenal gland and patented it. A company marketed his extract and, 
because they used the proprietary name adrenaline, epinephrine became the generic name in 
America and Japan.
There are arguments to prefer adrenaline over epinephrine. The gland is the adrenal gland, not the 
epinephric gland. However, the gland is above (‘epi’) the kidneys (which contain structures called 
nephrons) hence ‘epinephrine’. Unusually, these two terms persist in common use in different 
parts of the world. Naming conventions show international cooperation in science for mutual 
benefit. In the case of adrenaline/epinephrine, conventions developed by one set of scientists have 
not been adopted by others, although overall the two names are widely understood, as is their 
interchangeability. The IUPAC chemical name is internationally understood, although it would be 
unrealistic to use this in everyday discussions of this hormone!
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Top tip!
Because these 
reactions do not 
involve changes in 
gene transcription or 
new protein synthesis, 
they occur rapidly.
	
◆Adenylyl cyclase/
adenylate cyclase: 
enzyme that catalyses 
the formation of cAMP 
from ATP.
	
◆Phosphodiesterase: 
enzyme that catalyses 
the breaking of a 
phosphodiester bond in 
an oligonucleotide.
	
◆Kinase: enzyme that 
catalyses the transfer of 
a phosphate group from 
ATP to a specific amino 
acid side chain on a target 
protein.
	
◆Phosphorylase: 
enzyme that breaks 
down glucose-based 
polysaccharides 
(e.g. glycogen) to glucose 
1-phosphate.
inactive 
kinase 
enzyme
inactive 
phosphorylase 
enzyme
active kinase enzyme
active phosphorylase enzyme
glucose 1-phosphate
glycogen
cAMP
 
■Figure C2.1.11 
Cascade of reaction 
triggered by the 
binding of epinephrine 
to a target cell


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
463
TOK
The story of (R)-1-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-2-methylaminoethanol is interesting in that it shows 
how reliant the development of biological knowledge is on the community of biologists. The 
interactions and sharing of knowledge between Oliver, Schäfer, Abel and Takamine all resulted in 
new knowledge and development of the chemical, although under various names. This emphasizes 
how new knowledge, and the language used to express the knowledge, sometimes takes time 
to formalize. One important function of the IUPAC is to create a single, authoritative source of 
knowledge in chemistry for the various scientific communities that use it.
Transmembrane receptors with 
tyrosine kinase activity
 
■Tyrosine kinases
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) belong to a major class of receptors that have enzymatic activity. 
One RTK complex (Figure C2.1.12) may activate ten or more different signal transduction pathways 
and cellular responses, helping the cell to regulate and coordinate several cell 
activities simultaneously. 
+ ligands
OFF
P
P
P
P
P
P
ON
b
a
P
ligands
tyrosine kinase domain
phosphorylation
Key:
 
■Figure C2.1.12 Activation of an RTK stimulates the assembly of an intracellular signalling complex
An RTK is a single polypeptide chain with a single transmembrane a-helix, an extracellular ligand 
binding site and an intracellular tail that functions as tyrosine kinase and contains many tyrosine 
amino acid residues. 
Before a ligand binds, the receptors exist as individual RTK monomers. The binding of a ligand to the 
extracellular binding sites of RTKs causes two RTK proteins to associate together in the membrane, 
forming a dimer (Figure C2.1.12). Dimerisation brings a suitable substrate up to the kinase active 
site in the intracellular tails of RTK. Tyrosine kinase adds a phosphate group from an ATP molecule 
to the tyrosine residues on the tail of the other RTK protein by autophosphorylation.
The activated RTK will trigger the assembly of specific relay proteins on the receptor tails, activating 
them. Each activated protein triggers a signal transduction pathway, leading to a cellular response. 
 
■Insulin signalling
Insulin functions as an extracellular messenger molecule (hormone), informing cells that glucose 
levels are high. Cells that express insulin receptors on their surface, such as cells in the liver, respond 
to this message by increasing glucose uptake, increasing glycogen and triglyceride synthesis, and/or 
decreasing gluconeogenesis. The ligand (insulin) binds to an insulin receptor, an RTK.
	
◆Tyrosine kinase: an 
enzyme that catalyses 
the transfer of phosphate 
groups from ATP to the 
tyrosine (amino acid) 
residues on a substrate 
protein, activating it.
	
◆Dimer: a molecule 
composed of two 
structurally similar 
subunits. 
	
◆Dimerisation: the 
formation of a dimer 
(from two monomers).
	
◆Autophos­
phorylation: the 
phosphorylation of a 
kinase by itself.
	
◆Relay protein: 
a protein that passes the 
signal to the next member 
of the signalling pathway.
	
◆Gluconeogenesis: 
set of enzyme-catalysed 
reactions by which 
glucose is synthesized 
from small organic 
molecules such as 
pyruvate, lactate or 
amino acids.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
464
Insulin uses RTK signalling (Figure C2.1.13) to allow cells to uptake glucose. Activated relay proteins 
cause vesicles embedded with glucose transporter proteins to move to the cell surface membrane. 
The vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane, inserting the transporter proteins into the cell surface 
membrane, which results in the increase in uptake of glucose into muscle cells.
Many glycogen synthase molecules are activated, which will catalyse the synthesis of glycogen from 
glucose (glycogenesis). Hence the binding of a single insulin molecule to a receptor will lead to the 
synthesis of large amounts of glycogen. 
The signal is terminated when insulin is released from receptors, the tyrosine residues are 
dephosphorylated by phosphatases and the two halves of the dimer separate. Protein phosphatases 
inactivate protein kinases by dephosphorylation. 
	
◆Glycogenesis: the 
enzymatic formation or 
synthesis of glycogen.
Figure C2.1.13 shows the effect of insulin on cells. The numbers in the figure 
correspond to the following events:
1	 Insulin activates RTK receptors.
2	 Relay proteins are activated, which travel to vesicles within the cell.
3	 These vesicles contain glucose transporter proteins (channel proteins known 
as GLUT4 (glucose transporter type 4).
4	 The GLUT4 vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane.
5	 The GLUT4 proteins become incorporated in the membrane, where they 
transport glucose into the cell.
 
■Figure C2.1.13 Insulin–RTK signalling pathway
Intracellular receptors that 
affect gene expression
Steroid (and thyroid) hormones are extracellular chemical signal molecules that can also pass 
through the plasma membrane. Testosterone, a steroid hormone secreted by the cells of the testes, 
travels through the blood and enters cells all over the body. However, only cells that contain receptor 
molecules for testosterone will respond. 
In the cytoplasm of target cells, the hormone binds to the receptor, activating it. With the hormone 
attached, the activated ligand–receptor complex then enters the nucleus. 
The activated ligand–receptor complex (or nuclear receptor) acts as a transcription factor and binds 
to a regulatory sequence in the DNA promoting transcription of specific genes, giving rise to male 
secondary sexual characteristics. Not all genes are transcribed in the genome – specific genes can be 
activated (a process called gene expression) to produce proteins required by the cell or organism (see 
Chapter D1.2).
Top tip!
Intracellullar receptors and a very similar signalling pathway operate for the female steroid 
hormones, oestradiol and progesterone. This is covered in more detail on page 465.
	
◆Nuclear receptor: 
eukaryotic protein that, 
on binding with a signal 
molecule, enters the 
nucleus and regulates 
transcription.
Link
Transcription and 
gene expression are 
covered in Chapter 
D1.2, page 615 
and Chapter D2.2, 
page 670.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C2.1   Chemical signalling
465
Effects of the hormones oestradiol 
and progesterone on target cells 
In the ovary, each ovum (egg) is surrounded by a protective structure called the ovarian follicle, 
which nourishes the ovum. The follicle also secretes the steroid hormones oestradiol and 
progesterone. Oestradiol is synthesized mainly in the ovary, but also in the placenta, testis and 
possibly the adrenal cortex. Oestradiol controls the development and maintenance of female 
sex characteristics.
The production of oestradiol in women’s ovaries is controlled by hormones released from both the 
hypothalamus in the base of the brain and the pituitary. The hypothalamus releases a hormone 
called gonadotropin-releasing hormone. This hormone then acts on the pituitary gland to cause 
the release of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which are involved 
in the menstrual cycle. The target cells, as well as being located in the pituitary, are also located in 
the lining of the uterus, breasts and bone marrow. The interaction between the hormone and these 
tissues leads to the development of female secondary sexual characteristics in puberty.
Once a month, one egg is released from a follicle in a process known as ovulation. After ovulation, 
the follicle becomes a structure known as the corpus luteum. Progesterone is produced primarily 
by the corpus luteum but also by the placenta and prepares the inner lining of the uterus 
(endometrium) for implantation of a fertilized ovum. If implantation fails, the corpus luteum 
degenerates and progesterone production stops. If implantation occurs, the corpus luteum continues 
to secrete progesterone, under the influence of LH and prolactin, for several months of pregnancy, 
after which the placenta takes over this function. During pregnancy, progesterone maintains the 
endometrium of the uterus and prevents further release of ova from the ovary.
7	 State the type of chemical signalling shown by the secretion of hormones from the 
pituitary gland.
Regulation of cell signalling pathways 
by positive and negative feedback 
The steps in a chemical signalling pathway may be controlled by feedback regulation. In positive 
feedback, changes increase and amplify conditions further away from the starting point (i.e. away 
from equilibrium). In negative feedback, the feedback loop leads to a return to the initial 
conditions (Figure C2.1.14). 
	ATL C2.1B 
Positive and negative feedback loops are covered throughout this course and occur in every level 
of biological organization. Work through the book, making a list of all the examples of negative 
and positive feedback. Create diagrams that show the process of feedback in each case. These 
notes will help you when you come to revise for your exams.
	
◆Ovarian follicle: 
a fluid-filled spherical 
sac that contains and 
nourishes an immature 
egg, or oocyte.
	
◆Oestradiol: a steroid 
hormone; a sex hormone 
of female mammals.
	
◆Progesterone: 
hormone released by 
the corpus luteum that 
stimulates the uterus to 
prepare for pregnancy.
Link
Control of the 
developmental 
changes at puberty 
is covered in Chapter 
D3.1, page 709.
Link
The menstrual cycle, 
ovulation and changes 
during the ovarian 
and uterine cycles 
and their hormonal 
regulation are covered 
in detail in Chapter 
D3.1, page 698. 
	
◆Feedback: when 
part of the output from 
a system returns as an 
input, so as to affect 
subsequent outputs.
	
◆Positive feedback: 
feedback that increases 
change; it promotes 
deviation away from an 
equilibrium.
	
◆Negative feedback: 
feedback that tends to 
counteract any deviation 
from equilibrium and 
promotes stability.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Cells
466
signalling
pathway 1
positive feedback
X
+
Y
signalling
pathway 2
negative feedback
X
−
Y
 
■Figure C2.1.14 Positive and negative feedback within an intracellular chemical signalling pathway
Top tip!
Positive feedback can generate all-or-none, switch-like responses, but negative feedback can 
generate responses that oscillate on and off. More typically they act after some time delay to shut 
down the pathway once it has produced its effects. 
 
■Fruit ripening as an example of positive feedback
Plants make extensive use of transmembrane receptors, especially enzyme-coupled receptors. 
Plant receptors are thought to play an important part in a large variety of cell signalling processes, 
including those controlling plant growth, development and disease resistance. Plant cells do not use 
RTKs, cAMP or steroid hormone-type nuclear receptors.
One of the best-studied signalling systems in plants controls the response of cells to ethylene 
(ethene, C2H4), a gaseous molecular hormone that controls seed germination and fruit ripening. 
Ethylene receptors function as enzyme-coupled receptors. It is the empty receptor that is active: in 
the absence of the ethylene molecule, the empty receptor activates a protein kinase that switches off 
the ethylene-responsive genes in the nucleus. When ethylene is present, the receptor and kinase are 
inactive, and the ethylene-responsive genes are transcribed.
 
■Control of blood sugar as an example of negative feedback
The use of insulin in the control of blood sugar is an example of a negative feedback loop. Insulin 
causes the absorption of glucose by cells where it is stored as glycogen (page 761). This lowers the 
blood sugar concentration, which means that insulin is no longer produced by the pancreas as blood 
sugar levels have returned to normal.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What patterns exist in communication in biological systems?
2	 In what ways is negative feedback evident at all levels of organization?
Link
Positive feedback in 
fruit ripening is also 
covered in Chapter 
C3.1, page 516.
Link
The regulation of 
blood glucose is 
covered in Chapter 
D3.3, page 761.
