Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
490
C3.1
Integration of body systems
•	 What are the roles of nerves and hormones in the integration of body systems?
•	 What are the roles of feedback mechanisms in the regulation of body systems?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C3.1.1 	 System integration
	 C3.1.2 	 Cells, tissues, organs and body systems as a hierarchy of subsystems that are 
integrated in a multicellular living organism
	 C3.1.3 	 Integration of organs in animal bodies by hormonal and nervous signalling and 
by transport of materials and energy
	 C3.1.4 	 The brain as a central information integration organ
	 C3.1.5 	 The spinal cord as an integrating centre for unconscious processes
	 C3.1.6 	 Input to the spinal cord and cerebral hemispheres of the brain through 
sensory neurons
	 C3.1.7 	 Output from the cerebral hemispheres of the brain to muscles through 
motor neurons
	 C3.1.8 	 Nerves as bundles of nerve fibres of both sensory and motor neurons
	 C3.1.9 	 Pain reflex arcs as an example of involuntary responses with skeletal muscle as 
the effector
	 C3.1.10 	Role of the cerebellum in coordinating skeletal muscle contraction and balance
	 C3.1.11 	Modulation of sleep patterns by melatonin secretion as a part of 
circadian rhythms
	 C3.1.12 	Epinephrine secretion by the adrenal glands to prepare the body for 
vigorous activity
	 C3.1.13 	Control of the endocrine system by the hypothalamus and pituitary gland
	 C3.1.14 	Feedback control of heart rate following sensory input from baroreceptors 
and chemoreceptors
	 C3.1.15 	Feedback control of ventilation rate following sensory input from 
chemoreceptors
	 C3.1.16 	Control of peristalsis in the digestive system by the central nervous system and 
enteric nervous system
	 C3.1.17 	Observations of tropic responses in seedlings (HL only)
	 C3.1.18 	Positive phototropism as a directional growth response to lateral light in plant 
shoots (HL only)
	 C3.1.19 	Phytohormones as signalling chemicals controlling growth, development and 
response to stimuli in plants (HL only)
	 C3.1.20 	Auxin efflux carriers as an example of maintaining concentration gradients of 
phytohormones (HL only)
	 C3.1.21 	Promotion of cell growth by auxin (HL only)
	 C3.1.22 	Interactions between auxin and cytokinin as a means of regulating root and 
shoot growth (HL only)
	 C3.1.23 	Positive feedback in fruit ripening and ethylene production (HL only)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
491
System integration
Biological systems are very complex. Organisms are made of many interacting parts, and an 
increased number or specialization of those parts leads to greater complexity and their many parts 
interacting in numerous ways. This is true for every level of organization, from molecules to 
ecosystems (Figure C3.1.1). Interactions between systems or parts of systems means there is 
integration between the systems.
Concept: Interaction
System interaction and integration is a necessary process in living systems. Coordination 
is needed for component parts of a system to collectively perform an overall function.
System integration is necessary for living systems. To collectively perform an overall function, 
coordination is needed between component parts of a system.
ORGANISM
ECOSYSTEM
Abiotic factors:
climate, soil quality
Habitat 
Community
Biotic factors:
disease, parasites,
competition, predators,
decomposers
ORGAN
INTEGRATION
GENES
CELLULAR
INTEGRATION
MOLECULAR
INTEGRATION
 
■Figure C3.1.1 System integration exists at every level of biological organization
Integration in multicellular organisms
It can be said that ‘complex systems are more than the sum of their parts’. But what does this mean? 
The function of a cell, for example, depends on the collective behaviour of many molecular parts all 
acting together. These collective properties – known as emergent properties – are an essential 
property of biological systems. You cannot understand or predict the overall system’s behaviour 
based on the individual parts alone; a ‘holistic’ approach is needed. Emergent properties arise from 
the interactions of the parts of the larger system.
Concept: Interaction
Emergent properties arise from the interactions of the parts of the larger system. 
A hierarchy of subsystems work together to provide functions that the individual parts do 
not have. Emergent properties help living organisms better adapt to their environments.
	
◆Integration: the 
ability of interacting parts 
of a biological system to 
perform together and 
maintain a functioning 
organism or other 
biological system.
	
◆Emergent property: 
a property gained by a 
complex system when 
the individual parts 
work together.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
492
Cells, tissues, organs and organ systems have their own properties and represent a hierarchy of 
subsystems that are integrated in a multicellular living organism. Multicellular organisms, such as 
humans, have properties that emerge from the interaction of their cellular components. This integration 
is responsible for emergent properties. The cells and tissues of the small intestine (Figure C3.1.2) have 
their own properties and functions, but when they work together, they allow the whole organ to carry 
out the emergent properties of peristalsis, digestion, food absorption and transport.
pavement epithelium
a smooth, strong sheet
of cells
smooth muscle
(circular and
longitudinal) can
contract and relax
repeatedly for
long periods
without fatigue
Two of the many tissues that make up
the gut are illustrated here.
TS small intestine, low power [LP]
attachment to
body wall
peritoneum
(smooth lining)
connective tissue
(binds together
all the tissues)
villi (finger-like
projections into
the channel of
the gut)
 
■The hierarchy of subsystems in multicellular organisms 
Cellular level 
The basic unit of life is the cell, and cells are formed by macromolecules. Each macromolecule in 
a cell determines the structure and function of the cell. Nucleotides form nucleic acids containing 
genes that determine an organism’s characteristics. Interactions between genes and amino acids 
determine which proteins are formed and the ultimate function of the cell.
Tissue level
Multicellular organisms arrange cells into tissues, which are groups of similar cells that work together 
to perform a particular function. For example, a single epithelial cell cannot form a protective layer 
whereas multiple epithelial cells can form layers and other structures that can carry out functions 
such as protection, secretion, absorption, filtration and sensory reception. 
The five types of tissues found in animals (including humans) perform different functions:
l	 epithelial tissue forms the linings of organs
l	 connective tissue connects or separates, and supports all the other types of tissues in the body
l	 blood is considered a tissue because it is a collection of similar specialized cells that serve 
particular functions
l	 nervous tissue is comprised of neurons and allows the body to receive stimuli and 
coordinate responses
l	 muscle tissue is made up of cells capable of generating motion, such as pumping blood or 
moving the body.
Organs 
Different types of tissues combine to form organs that perform specialized functions (see 
Figure C3.1.2). The properties of an organ depend on the properties that emerge as a result of 
interactions between tissues and other previous levels of organization. For example, DNA determines 
how cells form tissues and how tissues form organs.
 ATL C3.1A 
Research one organ 
found in the body. How 
do the component 
cells and tissues work 
together to form the 
emergent properties of 
the organ?
 
■Figure C3.1.2 
Tissues of part of the 
mammalian gut


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
493
Organ systems
Organs form organ systems. For example, the digestive system is formed from interactions between 
the mouth, oesophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, small intestine and large intestine. The 
stomach cannot digest food without the enzymes and digestive fluids that the gallbladder, liver and 
pancreas make. The interactions between the organs in a system are controlled at the molecular level.
Organism level
Organ systems together create an organism. The organism is the combined interaction at every level 
of organization – the whole body cannot function without closely controlled system integration 
at every level. Ultimately, genes determine the structure and function of the components of an 
organism, and how they interact. 
An example of integration of body systems: the cheetah
A cheetah (see Figure B3.3.1, page 326) is an effective predator thanks to the integration of its body 
systems as shown in Table C3.1.1.
 
■Table C3.1.1 The integration of body systems in the cheetah
Hierarchy of 
subsystems
Description
Cellular level
Cheetah DNA provides the blueprints for its body shape and pigmentation of the fur to create 
spots for camouflage. These adaptations give the animal an advantage in hunting and hiding.
Tissue level
The cheetah has loose hips and shoulder joints, and a flexible spine for running. The spine is 
very flexible, flexing and storing potential energy, which is released when the spine springs 
back as the animal moves forwards. Teeth are smaller than other big cats to allow for a larger 
nasal passage to enable quick air intake.
Organ level
The cheetah has an enlarged heart to ensure effective delivery of glucose and oxygen to 
muscles for rapid physical response. Eyes are positioned for maximum binocular vision to 
enable distances to prey to be assessed accurately.
Organ system 
level
The breathing system enables rapid delivery of oxygen to muscles; the circulatory system 
delivers blood to muscles and other parts of the body, which enables it to run at very fast 
speeds.
Organism 
level
Built perfectly for chasing prey, with narrower paws than other big cats to have minimal contact 
with the ground, blunt claws to increase traction, and a long tail to act as a counterbalance, 
enabling the animal to run at 69–70 mph with an acceleration of 0–45 mph in 2.5 seconds.
Integration of organs in animal bodies 
The integration of organs in animal bodies is controlled by hormonal and nervous signalling, and by 
transport of materials and energy. Nervous signalling is examined in Chapter C2.2 (page 467), and 
the hormonal system will be outlined below.
 
■Introducing the endocrine system
Hormones are chemical substances that are produced and secreted from the cells of the ductless or 
endocrine glands (from ‘endo’ meaning ‘within’, and ‘crine’ = meaning ‘secreting’). The network of 
glands throughout the body is known as the endocrine system. In effect, hormones carry messages 
about the body – but in a completely different way from the nervous system. Hormones are known as 
‘chemical messengers’.
Hormones are transported in the bloodstream but they act only at specific sites called target organs. 
Although present in small quantities, hormones are extremely effective messengers, helping to 
control and coordinate body activities. Once released, hormones may cause changes to specific 
metabolic reactions of their target organs. However, they circulate in the bloodstream briefly.  
1	 Define the term 
emergent property.
	
◆Hormone: 
chemical messenger 
that is produced and 
secreted from the 
cells of the ductless or 
endocrine glands.
	
◆Endocrine glands: 
the hormone-producing 
glands that release 
secretions directly into 
blood plasma.
	
◆Endocrine system: 
the network of glands 
that produce hormones; 
they are released directly 
into the blood, where 
they travel to target 
tissues and organs 
throughout the body.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
494
In the liver, hormones are broken down and the breakdown products are excreted in the kidneys.  
So, long-acting hormones must be secreted continuously to be effective. 
An example of a hormone is insulin, released from endocrine cells in the pancreas. Insulin regulates 
blood glucose. The positions of endocrine glands in the body are shown in Figure C3.1.3.
pituitary gland
adrenal glands
epinephrine (controls
the body’s ‘ﬂight or
ﬁght’ response)
ovaries/testes
sex hormones –
oestradiol
and testosterone
hypothalamus
pineal gland
secr
secretes melatonin
to help regulate
the body's
circadian cycle
etes hormones
controlling activity
of the anterior
pituitary
thyroid gland
pancreas (islets
of Langerhans)
insulin, glucagon
(control blood
sugar level)
thymus gland
  
 
■Figure C3.1.3 The human endocrine system
The endocrine glands are ductless glands (Table C3.1.2).
 
■Table C3.1.2 Endocrine glands 
Endocrine glands
Description
these glands secrete hormones directly into the bloodstream 
at target organs, hormones trigger changes to specific metabolic reactions
Examples
islets of Langerhans: secrete insulin (Figure D3.3.3, page 762), target organs: muscle and liver tissue
posterior pituitary gland: secretes anti-diuretic hormone (ADH, Figure D3.3.13, page 776), target organs: collecting ducts of kidney tubules
gonads: secrete sex hormones (page 709), target organs: the gonads and other body tissues
pineal gland: secretes melatonin, target organs: tissues and organs that respond to our ‘body clock’ (Figure C3.1.10)
 ATL C3.1B 
Another set of glands in the body are the exocrine glands. These glands deliver their secretions via 
ducts, typically into the lumen of the gut or on to the body surface. Research exocrine glands and 
how their role differs from the role of endocrine glands. 
You will encounter some exocrine glands in Chapter D3.3, for example sweat glands, which 
secrete sweat on to the skin’s surface.
Hormonal control of body function is quite different from nervous control; the latter is concerned 
with quick, precise communication, whereas hormones mostly work by causing specific changes in 
metabolism and development, often over an extended period of time. However, these contrasting systems 
are both coordinated by the brain – the nervous system and hormones work together. Table C3.1.3 
distinguishes between the roles of the nervous system and endocrine system in sending messages. 
Link
How insulin regulates 
blood glucose is 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter 
D3.3, page 761.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
495
 
■Table C3.1.3 Comparison of the nervous and endocrine systems
Nervous system
Endocrine system
Type of message
electrical impulses; neurotransmitters
chemical messengers
Method of transmission
neurons and nerves
bloodstream
Parts of the system
central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
glands
Speed of action
very rapid
can be slow
Length of effect
short duration
long duration
Effectors
muscles or glands at specific locations
target cells in specific tissues
Distance of action
can act over very short distances as well as long 
distances (all parts of the body)
can act over long distances
Examples of processes controlled
reflexes, e.g. blinking and pain reflex
growth, development of reproductive system, 
homeostatic mechanisms
 
■Transport of materials in the blood system
Products of digestion are absorbed from the blood into body cells in a process called assimilation. 
The blood system plays a role in transporting materials between organs. In the first stage of 
assimilation, absorbed nutrients are transported from the intestine. Blood transports vitamins and 
inorganic ions to all cells, and the products of digestion are absorbed into the bloodstream where 
they are transported to all cells in the body. 
l	 All the products of carbohydrate digestion pass from epithelial cells in the lining of the small 
intestine to the bloodstream (capillary network) by facilitated diffusion. Monosaccharide sugars 
(mainly glucose) dissolve and are transported in blood plasma. From here, they are transported to 
the liver and then to other parts of the body. The liver maintains a constant level of blood sugar.
l	 Amino acids are actively transported into the epithelial cells of the small intestine by the action 
of membrane protein pumps, and pass into the capillary network. They dissolve in the plasma 
and the bloodstream transports them to the liver. Here, they contribute to the pool or reserves of 
amino acids from which new proteins are made in cells and tissues all over the body.
l	 The short-chain fatty acids (and glycerol) are absorbed by simple diffusion into the epithelial cells in 
the small intestine. From inside the epithelial cells, the short-chain fatty acids diffuse out into the 
capillaries and are transported in the bloodstream, just like the monosaccharides and amino acids.
l	 Long-chain fatty acids are combined with glycerol to reform triglycerides. Triglycerides are 
hydrophobic and so cannot travel in blood plasma without first being modified. Triglycerides 
are coated with proteins in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of epithelial cells. These complex 
molecules enter the lymph system (a body system that collects excess fluid from the blood), 
which transports them into the blood circulation at a point close to the heart.
l	 Waste products are also transported in the blood plasma. Urea is produced by the breakdown 
of amino acids in the liver. It is a toxic substance that is filtered from the blood in the kidneys. 
Carbon dioxide is a waste product of cellular respiration. Carbon dioxide is carried by both blood 
plasma and red blood cells, and it is removed from the body in the lungs.
The hepatic portal vein carries the products of digestion to the liver, where glucose may enter 
the liver cells and be converted to glycogen (page 763). Glucose remaining in the blood may be 
converted to glycogen in muscle cells around the body. Brain cells depend on a continuous supply of 
glucose from the blood circulation – they cannot store glycogen.
Oxygen combines with haemoglobin in red blood cells (Chapter B3.1, page 291) and is transported 
to cells for use in aerobic respiration.
	
◆Assimilation: uptake 
of nutrients into cells 
and the utilization of this 
material to provide energy 
and to synthesize new 
biological molecules.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
496
Integration by the central nervous system
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and spinal cord (Figure C3.1.4). Nerves of 
the peripheral nervous system (PNS) run to and from the central nervous system. Communication 
between the CNS and all parts of the body occurs via the PNS. The rather complex layout of the PNS is 
summarized in Figure C3.1.4.
central nervous 
system (CNS)
spinal cord
brain
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
neurons carrying 
impulses from sense 
organs to CNS
neurons carrying 
impulses from muscles 
and glands from CNS
somatic 
nervous system
autonomic 
nervous system
sympathetic 
nervous system
parasympathetic 
nervous system
 
■The brain as a central information integration organ
The human brain controls body functions (apart from those functions under the control of simple 
spinal reflexes) by:
l	 receiving impulses from sensory receptors
l	 integrating and correlating incoming information in association centres
l	 sending impulses to effector organs (muscles and glands), causing bodily responses
l	 storing information and building up an accessible memory bank
l	 initiating impulses from its own self-contained activities – the brain is also the seat of personality 
and emotions, and enables us to imagine, create, plan, calculate, predict and reason abstractly.
The cerebral hemispheres make up a large proportion of the brain (Figure C3.1.12, page 504) and are 
more highly developed in humans than in other animals.
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour
Research into memory and learning
Brain function, and in particular its higher functions such as 
memory and learning, are still only poorly understood by 
scientists. Research was initially undertaken by psychologists, 
but increasingly molecular and biochemical techniques are 
being used. Cooperation and collaboration between groups of 
scientists has been essential in developing an understanding of 
brain function.
Scientists have investigated the brain of Henry Molaison (HM), 
a patient famous for having severe amnesia following surgery 
that removed most of his hippocampus (the part of the brain 
associated with memory, emotions and motivation).
Throughout his life, MRI scans and thousands of psychological 
experiments were carried out to investigate the anatomy of 
HM’s brain and how it related to his lack of memory. After 
his death, 2000 slices from his brain were taken for onward 
research. These are being used at The Brain Observatory 
at UC San Diego, USA, where researchers are looking for 
physical traces of life events in brain microstructure using high-
resolution images at the neuron level.
The work of one group of scientists can add significantly to 
existing knowledge.
In 1997, Suzanne Corkin and her co-workers published a 
scientific paper in the Journal of Neuroscience, summarizing 
their work in which they had performed an MRI scan on the 
brain of HM.
Many researchers were already studying his cognitive impairment 
and were able to gain insight from her description of the actual 
damage seen in the scan, and how this leads to amnesia.
This illustrates how cooperation and collaboration between 
groups of scientists is essential in progressing scientific 
knowledge and understanding.
Link
The central nervous 
system and peripheral 
nervous system are 
introduced in Chapter 
C2.2, page 467.
 
■Figure C3.1.4 The 
organization of the central 
nervous system and 
peripheral nervous system


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
497
TOK
Should some knowledge not be sought on ethical grounds?
Henry Molaison’s initial surgery was experimental; his doctor hoped it would relieve his severe 
epilepsy, but the effect of the removal of parts of his hippocampus were unknown prior to the 
surgery. The surgery was successful in the treatment of his epilepsy, but it was devastating to 
Molaison, who could no longer form long-term memories. He lived in a care institute for the rest 
of his 55 years, under constant supervision and as the subject of innumerable interviews relating to 
his inability to create new memories. The knowledge gathered from these interviews and from the 
analysis of his brain after his death was hugely beneficial to our understanding of human memory 
and instrumental in the formation of an entirely new field of science: cognitive neuropsychology. 
This knowledge, however, was developed in the context of deep human tragedy. Was this 
knowledge worth the damage inflicted on Henry Molaison?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Researchers at Stanford University, USA, have been investigating how the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
(SCN), a region in the front part of the hypothalamus, as well as controlling circadian rhythm (the 
waking–sleep cycle; see page 502), has an important role in learning and memory. They found that 
when the SCN is not functioning properly in hamsters, memory is impaired. When they surgically 
removed the SCN, memory abilities returned. Other researchers have shown there is a link between 
altered circadian rhythms and diminished memory in people suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. It is 
possible that work on the role of the SCN relating to memory and learning will play an important 
role in understanding Alzheimer’s and other diseases.
Other work has shown how molecular biology and genetics are giving insights into how key proteins 
and other molecules influence memory. Recent animal studies have shown that manipulating these 
molecules can modify memories, with the potential of weakening traumatic memories that may underlie 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Such studies may also lead to new treatments for memory loss.
 ATL C3.1C 
This TED talk discusses how the mysteries of the mind could be solved, including mental illness, 
memory and perception: a supercomputer has been developed that models all the brain’s 
100 000 000 000 000 synapses. 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=LS3wMC2BpxU
The TED talk is over 12 years old. Is its message still up to date or has more recent research 
superseded it? Find out what current research shows.
The brain has many interconnected areas, containing on average 86 billion neurons, and can 
simultaneously perceive, interpret, store, analyse and distribute information. To what extent can 
the brain itself be thought of as a supercomputer?
Find out more about the brain using this New Scientist site:  
www.newscientist.com/article-topic/brains 
Tool 2: Technology
Using computer modelling
Download the 3D Brain app for iPhones and iPads:  
https://apps.apple.com/app/3d-brain/id331399332
Use rotate and zoom functions to discover how each brain region functions, and what 
happens when it is injured. How are regions of the brain involved in mental illness?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
498
 
■The spinal cord as an integrating centre for 
unconscious processes and autonomic functions
The spinal cord carries nerve impulses between the brain and the rest of the body. It also controls 
reflexes without input from the brain, where electrical impulses pass from receptors to the CNS 
along sensory neurons and synapse with interneurons that send electrical impulses along motor 
neurons directly to effectors. Reflexes are unconscious responses to stimuli that protect the body 
from harm. An example of a reflex is the pain reflex (see page 501). These unconscious processes 
are automatic and involuntary, whereas conscious processes are deliberate and voluntary. Autonomic 
functions (i.e. involuntary and not under direct control) include the sweating of the lower half of the 
body (which is transmitted through and processed by the spinal cord), defecation and urination.
 
■Input to the spinal cord and cerebral hemispheres of the brain 
through sensory neurons
The nervous system is built up from specialized cells called neurons. Neurons have a cell body and a 
number of extensions called nerve fibres. The three types of neuron are sensory neurons, motor 
neurons and relay neurons (Figure C2.2.2, page 469).
The cerebral hemispheres (see Figure C3.1.12 on page 504), an extension of the forebrain, form the 
bulk of the human brain. They consist of densely packed nerve cells (sometimes referred to as ‘grey 
matter’) and myelinated nerve fibres (known as ‘white matter’). The ratio of the size of the cerebral 
hemispheres to the size of the whole nervous system is larger in humans than in any other mammal. 
The human brain contains about 1011–1012 relay neurons and the same number again of supporting 
cells (known as neuroglia cells). Most of these neurons occur in the cerebral hemispheres, where 
each relay neuron is in synaptic contact with about a thousand other neurons. Mammals are the 
most intelligent of all animals, and their memory, complex behaviour and subtle body controls are 
linked to this development.
Many of the body’s voluntary (conscious) activities are coordinated in the cerebral hemispheres, 
together with many involuntary (unconscious) ones. They are an integrating centre of memory, 
learning, emotions and other complex functions.
The pathway of nerve impulses from receptor to CNS can be traced using the example of writing 
with a pen or pencil (see Figure C3.1.5):
1	 As the pen in touched, a sensory receptor in the skin of the fingers is stimulated. 
2	 The sensory receptor changes energy from touch to an electrical impulse (action potential) in the 
axon of the sensory neuron.
l	 Sensory neurons convey messages from receptor cells to the central nervous system.
l	 The electrical signal travels along the axon to the spinal cord and the brain.
3	 The electrical signal causes the release of a neurotransmitter at a synapse between the sensory 
neuron and an interneuron.
l	 The neurotransmitter stimulates the interneuron to form an action potential in its dendrites 
and cell body.
l	 The action potential travels along the axon of the interneuron, which results in 
neurotransmitter release at the next synapse with another interneuron.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse the 
parts of the nervous 
system involved 
with conscious 
processes, such as 
voluntary muscle 
movements, thought 
and speech, with 
unconscious processes, 
such as heart rate, 
regulation of pupil 
size and movement 
of food through the 
digestive system. 
Link
Motor, sensory and 
relay neurons are 
covered in more 
detail in Chapter C2.2, 
page 467.
2	 Compare and 
contrast motor, 
sensory and relay 
neurons by means 
of a concise table.
	
◆Cerebral 
hemisphere 
(cerebrum): the bulk of 
the human brain, formed 
during development by 
the outgrowth of part of 
the forebrain, consisting 
of densely packed 
neurons and myelinated 
nerve fibres.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
499
right side of brain
left side of brain
cerebral cortex
interneuron
upper motor
neuron
thalamus
sensory neuron
spinal cord
lower motor neuron
sensory receptor
neuromuscular junction
skeletal muscles
1
2
3
4
7
8
6
5
 
■Figure C3.1.5 Pathway of nerve impulses from receptor to effector
4	 This process of neurotransmitter release at a synapse followed by an action potential occurs many 
times as interneurons in higher parts of the brain (such as the cerebral cortex) are activated.
5	 Once interneurons in the cerebral cortex (the outer part of the brain – see page 487) are 
activated, perception occurs, and the outer surface of the pen is sensed as the fingers touch it. 
Conscious awareness of a sensation is primarily a function of the cerebral cortex.
 
■Output from the cerebral hemispheres of the brain to muscles 
through motor neurons
The pathway of nerve impulses from CNS to effector can be traced continuing the previous example 
of writing with a pen or pencil.
6	 A stimulus in the brain causes an action potential to form in the dendrites and cell body of an 
upper motor neuron (a type of motor neuron that synapses with a lower motor neuron farther 
down in the CNS – Figure C3.1.5).
l	 The action potential travels down the axon of the upper motor neuron.
7	 The action potential causes neurotransmitter release in the synapse between the upper and lower 
motor neurons.
l	 The neurotransmitter generates an action potential in a lower motor neuron (a type of motor 
neuron that directly supplies skeletal muscle fibres). 
8	 The action potential in the lower motor neuron causes neurotransmitter to be released at 
neuromuscular junctions formed with skeletal muscle fibres (which control the movement 
of fingers).
l	 The neurotransmitter stimulates the muscle fibres to form muscle action potentials.
l	 The muscle action potentials cause these muscle fibres to contract, which allows writing with 
the pen.
Top tip!
Remember – motor 
neurons transmit 
electrical impulses from 
the central nervous 
system to muscles 
and glands (effectors). 
Motor neuron 
pathways lead to 
muscles contracting.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
500
 ATL C3.1D 
Like most brain functions, the right side of the brain controls the left side of the body, and the 
left side of the brain controls the right side. The axons of the neurons from each side of the brain 
must therefore split in two (bifurcate) somewhere during their descent to the spinal cord so that 
they can change sides. This crossover occurs just before the junction between the medulla and 
the spinal cord.
Carry out research to find out the evolutionary reasons for the right side of the brain controlling 
the left half of your body, and vice versa. Use this video as a starting point:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=rB5IsOqYxFY
What impact does the crossover have following traumatic events such as brain injuries and strokes?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Nerves as bundles of nerve fibres of 
both sensory and motor neurons
A nerve consists of many axons of neurons collected into bundles. Large nerves, such as the sciatic 
nerves that go from the lower back to the feet, for example, contain tens of thousands of axons. 
Each bundle has several coverings of protective sheath, made of connective tissue (Figure C3.1.6):
l	 endoneurium: tissue surrounding each individual fibre
l	 perineurium: smooth connective tissue surrounding each bundle of fibres
l	 epineurium: fibrous tissue surrounding and enclosing a number of bundles of nerve fibres; most 
large nerves are covered by epineurium.
axon
nerve
epineurium
perineurium
endoneurium
blood vessels
Schwann cell
node of Ranvier
axon
myelin sheath
nerve fibres
 
■Figure C3.1.6 Transverse section of a peripheral nerve showing 
the protective connective tissue coverings
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse the 
term ‘neuron’ and 
‘nerve’. A neuron is a 
single specialized cell 
in the nervous system 
that conducts electrical 
impulses, whereas a 
nerve is a group of 
neurons.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
501
Pain reflex arcs 
Reflex arcs comprise the neurons that mediate the reflexes. The layout of a reflex arc is shown in 
Figure C3.1.7. 
sensory neuron
sense organ
e.g. pressure
receptor
stimulus
e.g. mechanical
pressure
relay neuron
motor neuron
effector organ
(e.g. muscle)
 
■Figure C3.1.7 The layout of a reflex arc
In animals, by means of a specific reflex arc, a particular stimulus produces the same immediate, 
quick and involuntary response – a reflex action – every time. In humans, an example of a reflex 
action is the jerking away of our hand from scalding hot water, or the withdrawal of a limb from pain 
(Figure C3.1.8). The pain reflex arc has a single relay neuron (interneuron) in the grey matter of the 
spinal cord and a free sensory nerve ending in a sensory neuron as a pain receptor (Figure C3.1.8). 
Within the nervous system are a vast number of reflex arcs. Many neurons connect reflex arcs with 
the control centre, the brain. The brain contains a highly organized mass of relay neurons, connected 
with the rest of the nervous system by motor and sensory neurons. With a nervous system of this 
type, complex patterns of behaviour are common in addition to many reflex actions. This is because:
l	 impulses that originate in a reflex arc also travel to the brain
l	 impulses may originate in the brain and be conducted to effector organs.
from
brain
relay
neuron
Possibility of:
• sensory input to brain
   (awareness, pain, memory)
• motor input from brain
   (‘get hand under cold water’).
grey matter
spinal
nerves
central canal
cell body of
sensory neuron
dendron of
sensory neuron
ventral
root
reﬂex action in response
to skin contact with a
very hot object
biceps (ﬂexor muscle)
is effector organ,
i.e. moves hand
away from heat
sensory receptor
in skin
(impulse generated here)
heat
(stimulus)
axon of
motor
neuron
 
■Figure C3.1.8 Pain reflex arcs as an example of involuntary responses with skeletal muscle as the effector


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
502
Consequently, much activity is initiated by the brain, rather than being merely a response to external 
stimuli. Also, reflex actions such as those responding to pain may be overruled by the brain and the 
response modified (for instance, we may decide not to drop an extremely hot object that is causing 
pain but that is also very valuable).
So, we can see that the nervous system of an animal, such as a mammal, has roles in:
l	 quick and precise communication between the sense organs that detect stimuli and the muscles 
or glands that cause changes
l	 complex behaviour patterns that animals display.
 ATL C3.1E 
Review reflex arcs using this animation:  
www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/reflexarcs.html
Produce a summary of the key points about the components of a reflex arc and how reflexes 
are coordinated.
3	 Describe how the 
body responds to a 
pain stimulus that 
can cause harm to 
the body.
Role of the cerebellum 
The cerebellum, part of the hindbrain (Figure C3.1.9), also has an 
external surface layer of grey matter. It is here that involuntary muscle 
movements of posture and balance are controlled. It is also where all precise, 
voluntary manipulations involved in hand movements, speech and writing 
are coordinated (rather than initiated). The cerebellum is in overall control 
of movements of the body, including skeletal muscle contraction and balance.
The cerebellum receives input from receptors and adjusts commands to motor 
neurons to move the body to maintain balance. It is responsible for fine-
tuning movement but does not initiate motor controls. While the cerebellum 
makes up 10% of the human brain’s volume, it contains 50% of the total 
number of neurons in our brains, indicating its importance.
Modulation of sleep patterns by melatonin
Daily rhythms in physiological processes and behaviour are common throughout the plant and animal 
world. For example, animals are active for only part of the 24-hour cycle. Some function at dusk or 
dawn (crepuscular), some in the night (nocturnal), and many during the day (diurnal), as humans do. 
In fact, much of our behaviour (physical activity, sleep, body temperature, secretion of hormones and 
other features) follows regular rhythms or cycles (Figure C3.1.10). These cycles operate over an 
approximately 24-hour cycle and are called circadian rhythms (meaning ‘about a day’).
Circadian rhythms are controlled by a ‘biological clock’ within the brain. However, cycles are 
coordinated with the cycle of light and dark – day and night. 
Melatonin is a hormone that is found naturally in the body. It is produced in the brain, in the 
pineal gland. This hormone contributes to setting our biological clock. More melatonin is released 
in darkness and more is released in seasonal longer nights, such as in winter time. Light decreases 
melatonin production, and this lowering of the melatonin level leads to the body’s preparation for 
being awake. In darkness, melatonin production resumes and sleepiness returns. The condition 
known as ‘winter depression’ (seasonal affective disorder, SAD), which affects the mental state of 
some people, is associated with higher-than-normal melatonin levels in the body.
cerebrum
cerebellum
brain stem
 
■Figure C3.1.9 Location of the 
cerebellum in the brain
	
◆Cerebellum: part of 
hindbrain, concerned with 
muscle tone, posture and 
movement.
	
◆Circadian rhythms: 
physical, mental and 
behavioural changes that 
follow a 24-hour cycle.
	
◆Melatonin: a 
hormone produced by the 
pineal gland in response 
to darkness; it coordinates 
the timing of circadian 
rhythms and sleep.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
503
deepest
sleep
lowest
heart rate
lowest body
temperature
sharpest rise
in blood pressure
melatonin
secretion stops
melatonin
secretion starts
highest
alertness +
highest risk of
myocardial infarction
least sensitivity
to pain
best
coordination
fastest reaction
time
greatest cardiovascular
and muscle strength
highest blood
pressure
highest body
temperature
working ability
decreases
24-hour
clock
18
6
12
We see that an external stimulus, such as light, has an impact on the biological clock, but the effects 
are not immediate. When normal patterns of light and dark are changed abruptly – for example, as a 
result of aircraft travel across different time zones – it may take several days before patterns of ‘sleep’ 
and ‘activeness’ return to normal. We say the traveller is suffering from ‘jet lag’. People who work 
day-and-night shift patterns that change frequently may have an even greater problem.
 ATL C3.1F 
What impact has modern technology had on our biological clocks, for example using phones and 
electronic devices at night? What impact does exposure to the bright screens of electronic devices 
have on us? What does it do to melatonin levels?
Engage in a class discussion on the use of technology at night and how it affects circadian 
rhythms, and the potential impacts on our health.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Epinephrine (adrenaline) secretion by the 
adrenal glands
Epinephrine is a hormone secreted by the adrenal glands (see Figure C3.1.3) to prepare the body for 
vigorous activity. It is released when the body is under stress. Epinephrine is carried in the blood 
throughout the body and causes the pacemaker of the heart to increase the heart rate. An increased 
heart rate delivers increased oxygen and glucose to tissues of the body, in particular muscles, 
enabling increased rates of aerobic respiration and, therefore, increased production of ATP for 
activity, ready for intense muscle contraction to happen. 
Epinephrine is a peptide hormone, which, while it circulates in the bloodstream, also stimulates liver 
cells to convert stored glycogen to glucose. The glucose formed then passes out from the liver cells 
and contributes to blood glucose levels. Increased blood glucose levels contribute to the elevated 
rates of respiration in muscle tissues and elsewhere in the body. 
 
■Figure C3.1.10 Our 
physiology and behaviour 
show circadian rhythm
4	 Define the term 
circadian rhythm.
	
◆Epinephrine: a 
hormone secreted by the 
adrenal medulla (and a 
neurotransmitter secreted 
by nerve endings of the 
sympathetic nervous 
system); it has many 
effects including the 
increase of heart rate 
and the breakdown of 
glycogen to glucose in 
muscle and liver.
5	 Suggest likely 
conditions or 
situations in 
which the body 
is likely to secrete 
epinephrine.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
504
kidneys
adrenal medulla releases epinephrine
adrenal cortex
under stress
increases blood
glucose
increases
heart rate
increases
breathing rate
‘fight or flight’
response
adrenal
glands
 
■Figure C3.1.11 The effects of epinephrine on the body
Control of the endocrine system by the 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland
The hypothalamus is a part of the brain that has a major endocrine function (see Figure C3.1.3 and 
C3.1.12). Most importantly, it is exceptionally well supplied with blood vessels and is the site of 
special neurons. 
The hypothalamus has a key role in the control of many aspects of body function and acts as a 
connection between the endocrine and nervous systems. Partly, this is achieved by the constant 
monitoring of blood composition as it circulates through the capillary networks of the hypothalamus. 
These data, and data from sensory receptors located in key organs in the body via sensory neurons 
and the spinal cord, enable the hypothalamus to regulate many body activities concerned with the 
maintenance of a constant internal environment – homeostasis. The hypothalamus, for example, 
secretes a hormone involved with the reabsorption of water from the kidneys. It also regulates the 
function of the pineal gland in relation to wake–sleep cycles (see page 502).
cerebral hemispheres
pineal gland
site of secretion of the 
hormone melatonin
cerebellum
medulla
hypothalamus
pituitary body
these structures are
shown enlarged in
Figure C3.1.13
fluid-filled space
(ventricles)
brain is surrounded
by and protected
within the cranium
brain in section (formed by enlargement and 
folding of fore-, mid- and hindbrain regions)
 
■Figure C3.1.12 The formation of the human brain
	
◆Hypothalamus: a 
structure at the base 
of the brain; a control 
centre for the autonomic 
nervous system and 
source of hormones for 
the pituitary gland.
Link
Homeostasis is 
covered in more detail 
in Chapter D3.3, 
page 760.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
505
neurosecretory cells
hypothalamus
capillary
network
hormone-
secreting cells
hormones to body cells
capillary
network
neurosecretory cells
artery
vein
vein
artery
pituitary gland
 
■Figure C3.1.13 The hypothalamus and pituitary gland
The pituitary gland is situated below the hypothalamus and is connected to it. The pituitary gland 
is part of the endocrine system and it has been called the ‘master’ hormone gland. However, it is the 
hypothalamus that largely controls the endocrine activity of the pituitary gland. The hypothalamus 
does this by releasing different hormones from its special neurosecretory cells into the portal vein 
running between the hypothalamus and pituitary gland (Figure C3.1.13), as well as by nerve 
impulses via other neurons that connect with the pituitary.
The hypothalamus is the site of production of several hormones. These largely control the 
secretion of other hormones by the pituitary gland, either by stimulating or inhibiting the release of 
specific hormones.
Hormones secreted by the pituitary gland control:
l	 growth
l	 developmental changes in the body’s tissues and organs
l	 reproduction
l	 homeostasis. 
One part of the pituitary gland does not synthesize hormones, but it does store and release two 
hormones produced in the hypothalamus: oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
	
◆Pituitary gland: the 
‘master’ endocrine gland, 
attached to the underside 
of the brain.
Top tip!
Make sure you 
understand the pituitary 
gland’s function and 
purpose. 
6	 In the nervous 
system, impulses 
reach a specific 
muscle or gland. 
Explain how the 
effects of hormones 
are restricted to 
particular cells 
or tissues.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
506
Control of heart rate using sensory input 
from baroreceptors and chemoreceptors
Nervous control of the heart is by reflex action. The heart receives impulses from the cardiovascular 
centre in the medulla of the hindbrain, via two nerves (Figure C3.1.14):
l	 a sympathetic nerve, part of the sympathetic nervous system, which speeds up the heart
l	 a branch of the vagus nerve, part of the parasympathetic nervous system, which slows down 
the heart.
Since the sympathetic nerve and the vagus nerve have opposite effects, we say they are antagonistic.
Nerves supplying the cardiovascular centre bring impulses from baroreceptors (stretch receptors) 
located in the walls of the aorta, in the carotid arteries, and in the wall of the right atrium, when 
change in blood pressure at these positions is detected.
l	 When blood pressure is high in the arteries, the heart rate is lowered by impulses from the 
cardiovascular centre, via the vagus nerve.
l	 When blood pressure is low, the heart rate is increased.
spread of
electrical
activity
through
heart muscle
sinoatrial
node
(pacemaker)
in right
atrium
atrio-
ventricular
node
Purkinje
fibres
brain
cardiovascular
control centre,
with excitatory
centre and
inhibitory centre
impulses to brain from:
  baroreceptors of
  carotid sinus and
  arteries, which detect
  changes in pressure
  baroreceptor of
  aortic arch
impulses via vagus nerve
decrease rate of heartbeat
impulses via sympathetic
nerve (in spinal cord) cause
norepinephrine to be
released, increasing rate of
heartbeat and force of
contraction
epinephrine in blood
increases rate of
heartbeat
increased volume of
blood stretches cardiac
muscle and triggers
increased volume of
blood pumped out
position of
pacemaker
heart
Forebrain (e.g. cerebral hemispheres,
hypothalamus) may send sensory impulses,
e.g. in anticipation of physical effort or over
an attack of road ‘rage’.
How the activity of the pacemaker is
regulated
stimulation of heartbeat
originates in the muscle
 
■Figure C3.1.14 Control of heart rate
Chemoreceptors in carotid arteries, the aorta (Figure C3.1.15) and the brain (see Figure C3.1.16) 
monitor the level of carbon dioxide in the blood and pH level. Increased carbon dioxide or decreased 
pH levels causes the chemoreceptors to signal the heart to beat faster. By increasing blood flow, 
carbon dioxide can be moved more quickly to the lungs where it is removed by diffusion into the 
alveolar spaces. This lowers carbon dioxide levels and returns blood pH to safe limits.
	
◆Medulla (medulla 
oblongata): structure 
located at the base of the 
brain, where the brain 
stem connects the brain 
to the spinal cord.
	
◆Sympathetic 
nervous system: 
part of the involuntary 
nervous system, 
antagonistic in effect 
to the parasympathetic 
nervous system.
	
◆Parasympathetic 
nervous system: part 
of the involuntary nervous 
system, antagonistic in 
effect to the sympathetic 
nervous system.
	
◆Baroreceptor: 
a sensory receptor 
responding to stretch in 
the walls of blood vessels 
to monitor blood pressure.
	
◆Chemoreceptor: 
receptors that 
monitor blood pH and 
concentrations of oxygen 
and carbon dioxide in the 
blood.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.1   Integration of body systems
507
Using chemoreceptors and baroreceptors, the medulla 
coordinates responses and sends nerve impulses to the 
heart to change the heart’s stroke volume and heart rate. 
Electrical impulses are sent from the chemoreceptors and 
baroreceptors to the medulla and, depending on the message, 
the medulla responds by stimulating either the sympathetic or 
parasympathetic nerves. 
l	 If blood pressure is low or carbon dioxide concentration 
high, the cardiovascular control centre of the medulla 
increases the rate of sinoatrial (SA) node firing through 
activation of the sympathetic nervous system. 
l	 If there is high blood pressure or low carbon dioxide 
concentration, the cardiovascular control centre reduces 
the rate of SA node firing by activating the parasympathetic 
nervous system. 
The nerve impulses along the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic neurons release different neurotransmitters 
in the SA node. The sympathetic nerve releases the 
neurotransmitter norepinephrine to increase heart rate. 
The parasympathetic nerve (vagus nerve) releases the 
neurotransmitter acetylcholine to decrease heart. Depending 
on which signals are sent, the SA node modifies its rate to 
either slow down or speed up the heart rate. 
carotid sinus
baroreceptor
carotid body
chemoreceptor
aortic
baroreceptor
aortic
chemoreceptor
SA node
AV node
 
■Figure C3.1.15 Location of chemoreceptors and 
baroreceptors responsible for controlling heart rate
Feedback control of ventilation rate following 
sensory input from chemoreceptors
The respiratory centre is situated in the medulla of the hindbrain and controls the rate at which we 
breathe (Figure C3.1.16). Here, two adjacent and interacting groups of nerve cells, known as the 
inspiratory centre and the expiratory centre respectively, bring about ventilation movements by 
reflex action. Breathing occurs automatically (it is involuntary). 
l	 The inspiratory centre sends impulses to increase rate and depth of breathing.
l	 The expiratory centre sends impulses to inhibit the inspiratory centre and stimulate expiration.
l	 Alternating impulses from these two centres cause rhythmic breathing.
The breathing rate is also continually adjusted. On average, our normal rate of breathing is about 
15 breaths per minute. Since the tidal volume is typically 400 cm3, the volume of air taken into the 
lungs in one minute (ventilation rate) is about 6 litres. We can consciously override this breathing 
rate with messages sent from the cerebral hemispheres, for example, when we prepare to shout, sing 
or play woodwind or brass instruments.
Breathing rates may also be adjusted without conscious thought. This occurs during increased 
physical activity when voluntary muscles use much more oxygen and more carbon dioxide is 
produced and transported in the blood. The main stimulus that affects breathing is the concentration 
of carbon dioxide in the blood. Blood carbon dioxide level is detected by the chemoreceptors present 
in the carotid arteries and aorta (Figure C3.1.15).
	
◆Respiratory centre: 
region of the medulla of 
the brain concerned with 
the involuntary control of 
breathing.
Link
The ventilation 
mechanism by which 
the air is moved 
in and out of the 
lungs is illustrated 
in Chapter B3.1, 
page 280.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
508
During increased respiration, as takes place during strenuous physical activity, levels of carbon 
dioxide in the blood increase. When this happens, the chemoreceptors that are hydrogen ion 
detectors (carbon dioxide is an acidic gas in solution) send impulses to the inspiratory centre in the 
brain stem as the blood pH level has changed. In response, this centre sends additional impulses 
to the intercostal muscles and diaphragm, causing an increase in their contraction rates. (To a 
lesser extent, lowered oxygen concentration is also detected.) In this way, increased levels of carbon 
dioxide in the blood result in a more rapid breathing rate, which causes more carbon dioxide to be 
exchanged at the alveoli and then exhaled.
After strenuous exercise stops, the concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood falls (and 
the concentration of oxygen rises). These changes are detected, and the ventilation rate is 
regulated accordingly.
cerebral
hemispheres
medulla of
hindbrain
spinal cord
aorta
carotid bodies
heart
respiratory
centre in medulla
oblongata of
hindbrain
expiratory
centre
inspiratory
centre
nerve to
internal
intercostal
muscles
nerve to
external
intercostal
muscles
phrenic
nerve to
diaphragm
inspiration
inflates and
stretches the lungs
carotid arteries
An increase in the CO2 concentration of the
blood is detected by chemoreceptors in the
medulla, aorta and carotid bodies.
 
■Figure C3.1.16 The control of ventilation rate
Control of peristalsis in the digestive 
system by the central nervous system 
and enteric nervous system
As we have already seen, the nervous system consists of the CNS (brain and spinal cord) and the 
PNS (Figure C3.1.4, page 496). The PNS contains the autonomic nervous system (ANS) – 
autonomic means ‘self-governing’. The ANS is special because it controls activities and structures 
inside the body that are mostly under unconscious (involuntary) control. In effect, the ANS regulates 
the working of the interior of the body, such as heart rate (page 320) and ventilation rate (page 283), 
more or less without our knowledge. The enteric nervous system (ENS), part of the ANS, is a 
network of sensory neurons, motor neurons and interneurons embedded in the wall of the 
gastrointestinal system. We will look at the action of the ENS in control of peristalsis.
7	 Outline the role of 
baroreceptors and 
chemoreceptors 
in the feedback 
control of 
heart rate.
	
◆Autonomic nervous 
system (ANS): the 
involuntary nervous 
system.
	
◆Enteric nervous 
system (ENS): network 
of sensory neurons, motor 
neurons and interneurons 
embedded in the wall 
of the gastrointestinal 
system.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C3.1   Integration of body systems
509
 
■Movement of food through the alimentary canal
In the nutrition of mammals, food is taken into the alimentary canal (gut). This is a long tube with a 
muscular wall, beginning at the mouth and ending at the anus. The whole structure is specialized for 
the movement and digestion of food, and for the absorption of the useful products of digestion. 
The ENS extends from the lower third of the oesophagus (the muscular tube that connects the 
mouth to the stomach) through to the rectum. Digestion is controlled through the integration of 
multiple signals from the ENS and CNS. Throughout the gut, waves of contraction and relaxation of 
the circular and longitudinal muscles of the wall propel food along. This process is known as 
peristalsis. Gut muscles are described as involuntary muscles because they are not under conscious 
control. The swallowing of food and removal of faeces from the body are under voluntary control by 
the CNS, but peristalsis between these two points in the digestive system is under involuntary 
control by the ENS. 
The action of the ENS ensures passage of material through the gut is coordinated. Neural signals 
pass between distinct gut regions to coordinate digestive activity.
Common mistake
Do not confuse the terms ‘enteric’ and ‘autonomic’. Both refer to the involuntary nervous system, 
but the enteric nervous system is the part which specifically serves the gastrointestinal system.
Observations of tropic responses in seedlings
The reactions of plants and animals to changes within their environments (their sensitivity) differ. 
Most plants are sessile, growing in one place and staying there. Therefore, plant responses are often 
less evident than those of animals. However, plants are highly sensitive to environmental 
disturbances. Unlike animals, plants have no nervous system and no muscle tissue, so their 
responses may be less dramatic than those of animals. Fast movements by plants are extremely rare 
so most responses by plants are changes in growth. An example of this is the growth of young stems 
towards light. Plant organs respond to external stimuli. The response to the stimulus is determined 
by the direction of the stimulus and is called a tropic movement (tropism) or tropic response.
You can gather different types of data when observing tropic responses in seedlings. For qualitative 
data, you could draw diagrams to record your observations of seedlings, illustrating tropic responses. 
For quantitative data you could measure the angle of curvature of the seedlings as they respond to 
external stimuli. 
 ATL C3.1G 
Discuss with a partner what qualitative and quantitative data you could collect in an experiment 
investigating the effect of light on plant growth. Write down as many as you can think of together.
	
◆Peristalsis: waves of 
muscular contractions 
passing down the 
gut wall.
Link
Sensitivity is a 
function of life in 
organisms and is 
discussed in Chapter 
A2.2, page 73.
	
◆Tropism: a growth 
response of plants in 
which the direction of 
growth is determined 
by the direction of 
the stimulus.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
510
Nature of science: Observations
You need to be able to distinguish between qualitative and quantitative observations. Quantitative 
data are measurable, for example, measuring the angles of the seedlings’ curvatures. Qualitative 
data are descriptive and based on interpretation, such as your drawings of the seedlings’ responses. 
When collecting data, understanding what factors will limit the accuracy and precision of your 
measurements is important. 
Accuracy is how close to the true value a result is, whereas precision describes the reproducibility 
of repeated measurements of the same quantity and how close they are to each other. It is the 
degree to which repeated measurements, under the same experimental conditions, give the same 
result. Remember, measurements can be precise but not accurate. Replicates (repeat data) can 
improve the reliability of an investigation and enable anomalies to be identified.
Not precise
Not accurate
Precise
Not accurate
Not precise
Accurate
Precise
Accurate
 
■Figure C3.1.17 Accuracy versus precision
Precision in tropism experiments can be improved by carrying out the same methodology in 
exactly the same way for each repeat. One way to analyse the precision of the measurements is to 
determine the range, or difference, between the lowest and the highest measured values, or the 
standard deviation. Small ranges or standard deviation indicates high precision.
In order to improve a measurement’s accuracy, all other variables must be controlled (kept the 
same). In the tropism experiment, other factors that can affect the growth of plants must be 
kept the same, such as volume of water given to seeds, the number of seeds in each sample, the 
distance between each seed, and the temperature they are grown at. If the experiment is carried 
out in the same way each time, the repeats show similar results so there is low variability in data, 
and other variables except the independent variable are controlled, the accuracy of the experiment 
will be increased.
Link
The definitions 
for qualitative 
and quantitative 
observations are 
given in Chapter A2.2, 
page 59.
Positive phototropism
The response of plants to the stimulus of light is called phototropism. Growing towards a stimulus 
is said to be a ‘positive’ response, and so the directional growth response to lateral light in plant 
shoots is known as positive phototropism (Figure C3.1.18). By growing towards light, leaves are 
orientated towards the sunlight and so maximize the opportunity for photosynthesis. 
	
◆Phototropism: 
response of plants to the 
stimulus of light.
	
◆Positive 
phototropism: the 
directional growth 
response in plant shoots 
towards lateral light 
sources.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C3.1   Integration of body systems
511
 
■Figure C3.1.18 Phototropism in plants: seedlings grow towards a light source
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Look carefully at the three experiments shown in 
Figure C3.1.19.
Analyse the information in each figure and deduce 
what each experiment indicates about the response of 
plants to light. Which part of the plant responds to the 
stimulus? How is the response to light coordinated?
Write a conclusion for each experiment and justify 
your answers (give valid reasons or evidence to support 
your conclusions).
Hint: agar (Figures b and c) is a jelly-like substance 
which substances can diffuse into. The impermeable 
block (Figure b) is resistant to absorbance: substances 
cannot diffuse into it.
You can check whether you have developed the correct 
conclusions using this site:  
www.youtube.com/watch?v=4-2DZo2ppAY
 
■Figure C3.1.19 
Three experiments 
investigating 
the response of 
plants to light
shoot bends
towards the light
shoot bends
towards the light
no bending
intact
shoot
tip of
shoot covered
with black paper
tip of shoot
covered with
transparent cap
experimental set-up
result
a
shoot bends
towards light
tip
removed
tip removed
and replaced on
impermeable block
tip removed
and replaced
on agar block
no bending
no bending
b
tip cut off
and placed on
agar block
block then placed
on the left-hand side of the
remaining shoot in even light.
shoot bends
over in even light
c
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
light
 
Top tip!
You may encounter 
other plant tropisms. 
This course studies the 
response by plants to 
light (phototropism). 
Other responses do not 
need to be known.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
512
If a plant is exposed to light equally from all directions, it grows directly upwards, whereas when 
exposed to unidirectional light, it bends towards the light source. Figure C3.1.20 shows a possible 
explanation of why this happens. The exact mechanism will be explored on page 513.
1 the tip produces a
   growth substance
1 the tip
   produces
   a growth
   substance
2 both sides of the shoot
   are equally stimulated by
   the growth substance, so
   the shoot grows upwards
   towards the light
2 more growth
   substance reaches
   the shaded side
3 the growth
   substance
   stimulates
   the cells to
   elongate
   faster
4 cells on the light
   side receive less
   growth substance.
   They elongate more
   slowly so the shoot
   bends towards
   the light
light
light
 
■Figure C3.1.20 Possible explanation of phototropism in a shoot
Phytohormones
Among the internal factors that play a part in plant sensitivity, the most important are the substances 
called phytohormones (plant growth regulators) and their effects. There are five major types of 
phytohormones naturally occurring in plants: auxin, gibberellin (GA), cytokinin, ethylene and 
abscisic acid (ABA). The effects of these chemicals are rather different from those of animal 
hormones (see Table C3.1.4).
 
■Table C3.1.4 Differences between animal hormones and phytohormones
Phytohormones (plant growth regulators)
Animal hormones
produced in a region of plant structure, e.g. stem or 
root tips, in unspecialized cells 
produced in specific glands in specialized cells, e.g. 
islets of Langerhans in the pancreas
not necessarily transported widely, or at all, and some 
are active at sites of production
transported to all parts of the body by the 
bloodstream
not particularly specific, tend to influence different 
tissues and organs, sometimes in contrasting ways
effects are mostly highly specific to a particular tissue 
or organ, and without effects in other parts or on 
different processes
In plant tissues, phytohormones occur in very low concentrations, making it difficult to determine 
their precise role. Whereas animal hormones are produced in discrete endocrine glands, 
phytohormones are produced by a variety of plant tissues and can reinforce another phytohormone’s 
effects or oppose them. 
Phytohormones can diffuse from cell to cell or be carried in the phloem or xylem, although not all 
are transported away from their source. Depending on their concentration (low or high), they may 
have profoundly different effects, based on the tissue they are in or on the stage of development of 
that tissue.
	
◆Phytohormones: 
plant hormones 
that regulate plant 
growth, development, 
reproductive processes, 
longevity and death; 
responsible for the 
adaptation of plants to 
environmental stimuli.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C3.1   Integration of body systems
513
 
■Table C3.1.5 Phytohormones: roles, synthesis and structural formulae
Auxins (indoleacetic acid, IAA)
Roles
promotion of extension growth of stems and roots (at different concentrations)
dominance of terminal buds
promotion of fruit growth
inhibition of leaf fall
Synthesis
at stem and root tips, and in young leaves (from the amino acid tryptophan)
Gibberellins (GAs)
Roles
promotion of extension growth of stems
delay of leaf senescence and leaf fall
inhibition of lateral root initiation
switching on of genes to promote germination
Synthesis
in the embryos of seeds and in young leaves (except in genetically dwarf varieties)
Abscisic acid (ABA)
Roles
a stress hormone 
triggering of stomatal closure when leaf cells are short of water
induction of bud and seed dormancy
Synthesis
in most organs of mature plants, in very small amounts
The structural formulae of phytohormones show how chemically diverse these substances are (they do not need to be memorized).
C
H
CH
CH2
N
H
HC
HC
C
C
C
H
C
COOH
indoleacetic acid (the principal auxin)
gibberellins
e.g. gibberellic acid
3
4
C=O
HO
CH3
CH2
COOH
7
8
OH
O
abscisic acid
H3C
CH3
O
OH
CH3
COOH
H
CH3
The role of auxin
Auxin was initially discovered by Darwin as he investigated the curvature of the protective sheath 
covering emergent plant shoots towards a light source. It is manufactured by cells undergoing 
repeated cell division, such as those found at the stem and root tips. 
Consequently, the concentration of auxin is highest there. Auxin is then transported to the region 
of growth behind the tip, where it causes cells to elongate. A coleoptile is the sheath that covers the 
primary bud of a seedling, which goes on to form the stem and leaves.
Auxin has a major role in the growth of the shoot apex, where it promotes the elongation of cells (see 
below). It also inhibits the growth and development of lateral buds that occur immediately below the 
terminal growing point. This leads to a quality known as apical dominance. However, a high 
concentration of auxin actually inhibits growth in length of the stem. Other hormones, the 
gibberellins, interact with auxin to enhance stem elongation. Cytokinins, from the root apex, pass 
back up to the stem and promote lateral bud growth – it is antagonistic to the effect of auxin in this 
respect. The full picture of plant hormone interactions is a complex one. 
	
◆Auxin: plant growth 
substance, indoleacetic 
acid, which generally 
stimulates cell elongation.
Top tip!
Unlike many hormones, 
auxin is not a protein 
but is the chemical 
indoleacetic acid 
in its naturally 
occurring form.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
514
Nature of science: Experiments
Developments in analytical techniques allow the detection of trace amounts of hormones
A DNA microarray consists of a collection of DNA probes 
(containing sequences of DNA) attached to a solid surface. 
The ‘surface’ of the microarray can be a glass or silicon chip, 
to which the DNA is covalently bonded. DNA from a sample is 
broken up into fragments that can react with the DNA probes: 
if they contain complementary sequences, the probes will 
bind to the sample DNA. One use for such microarrays is the 
detection and measurement of the expression of particular 
genes. Genes being expressed may be caused to fluoresce so 
they can be detected. In plants, the hormone auxin has been 
shown to influence gene expression and so regulates growth 
and development. Data on this have been obtained from 
studies on cells of a small flowering plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, 
when grown under the influence of unilateral environmental 
stimuli, such as light or gravity. A combination of several genes 
is typically involved.
unilateral light
auxin travels
down through
stem tissue
auxin produced in
cells of stem tip
auxin on illuminated
side is transported
to dark side
increased concentration of auxin enhances
elongation growth on the darkened side
explanation of positive phototropic
response of stems
 
■Figure C3.1.21 The role of auxin in phototropism
Figure C3.1.21 shows the effect of auxin in coleoptiles. 
The positively phototropic response of plants occurs as follows.
l	 The light stimulus causes auxin to be released from the growing tip of the coleoptile.
l	 Light from the illuminated side of the plant causes auxin to accumulate on the darkened side of 
the stem, increasing its concentration.
l	 Auxin on the darkened side causes cells to elongate there, bending the stem towards the light 
(Figure C3.1.21).
 
■Auxin efflux carriers
Auxin effects on growth and development are by direct action on the components of growing cells, 
including the walls, and on the gene-expression mechanisms operating in the nucleus. Auxin 
transport across cells is polar: auxin entry into the cell is passive (by diffusion) and its efflux is active 
(ATP-driven). Auxin can diffuse freely into plant cells but not out of them. This mechanism of auxin 
movement and the ways in which auxin may influence the growth and development of cells are 
outlined in Figure C3.1.22. Note particularly the mechanisms of movement of auxin into and out of 
the cell; auxin efflux pumps set up concentration gradients in plant tissues. Auxin efflux carriers can 
be positioned in a cell membrane on one side of the cell. If all cells coordinate to concentrate these 
carriers on the same side, auxin is actively transported from cell to cell through the plant tissue and 
becomes concentrated in part of the plant.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
C3.1   Integration of body systems
515
polar auxin transport 
(passive entry above, active 
pumping out at base of cell 
by auxin efflux pumps)
genes for growth/ 
development 
transcribed or 
suppressed
cytosol (with ribosomes, 
RER, SER, mitochondria 
and Golgi apparatus)
auxin-triggered cell 
elongation (acid growth 
hypothesis)
• auxin stimulates proton
pumps
• wall becomes acidic
• low pH triggers breakage of
cross-links between 
cellulose microfibril and 
binding polysaccharides
• hydrolytic enzymes attack
exposed binding 
polysaccharides
• wall resistance to stretching
is decreased – turgor of cell 
causes stretching/ 
elongation of cell wall
auxin-mediated regulation 
of gene expression 
(promotion/inhibition of gene 
expression via transcription 
regulation/transcription factors)
plasma
membrane
base of stem root
apex of stem/root
ATP-activated
auxin efflux pumps
cell wall (cellulose microfibrils
bound by other polysaccharides) 
passive
auxin-influx
channels
auxin
auxin
auxin
auxin
vacuole
nucleus
auxin pumped out
of cell here
entry of auxin
by diffusion
 
■Figure C3.1.22 Auxin – mechanisms of movement and control
Auxin efflux carriers are an example of maintaining concentration gradients of phytohormones.
 
■Promotion of cell growth by auxin
Auxin promotes hydrogen ion secretion into the apoplast (the pathway through the non-living part 
of a cell, e.g. cell walls and spaces between cells), acidifying the cell wall. Proteins called expansins, 
activated by H+ ions, alter the pattern of hydrogen bonding between the polysaccharides in the cell 
wall, allowing these macromolecules to slip past each other, loosening cross-links between cellulose 
molecules and facilitating the stretching of the cell wall and, therefore, cell elongation. Concentration 
gradients of auxin cause the differences in growth rate needed for phototropism. 
In summary, auxin causes changes to the cell wall:
l	 an increase of protons (H+) in the cell wall causes the wall to become acidic
l	 low pH activates expansins, which trigger breakage of cross-links within cellulose
l	 cell wall resistance to stretching is decreased
l	 cell turgor causes stretching/elongation of cell wall.
8	 Describe the 
role of auxin in 
a phototropic 
response.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
516
Interactions between auxin and cytokinin
The phytohormone cytokinin is produced in the root tips. It is then transported to shoots, and 
shoot tips produce auxin, which is transported to roots. Interactions between these phytohormones 
help to ensure that root and shoot growth are integrated.
Both auxins and cytokinins have been described as essential regulators of many different plant 
processes with complex regulations at various levels, ranging from the synthesis of biological 
molecules to transport and signalling. Their activities can best be termed ‘antagonistic’, where one 
hormone influences the other and vice versa.
Concept: Interdependence
The activities of auxin and cytokinin are interdependent. Auxin positively affects 
cytokinin signalling, and cytokinin positively affects auxin production, thereby positively 
affecting auxin signalling.
In addition to growth and developmental processes, plants need to regulate responses to, and 
interactions with, their environment. Biotic and abiotic factors in the environment can cause stress 
for plants. Cytokinins and auxins have been established as hormones that regulate or adjust these 
responses in crop plants. 
Positive feedback in fruit ripening 
and ethylene production
Ethylene (IUPAC name: ethene) is a hormone in plants that stimulates the changes in fruits that 
occur during ripening. In turn, ripening stimulates increased production of ethylene. Increased 
ethylene increases fruit ripening, and so on (Figure C3.1.23). This process, where one change leads 
to an increased change away from the original condition, is called positive feedback. Positive 
feedback tends to amplify change away from equilibrium (a state of physical balance). The benefit of 
this positive feedback mechanism is that it ensures that fruit ripening is rapid and synchronized.
Ethylene is
produced
in one fruit
Nearby fruit
detect
ethylene gas
The nearby
fruit begins
to ripen
Ripe fruit
releases
ethylene
Overall ethylene
production
increases
More fruit
ripens
 
■Figure C3.1.23 Positive feedback in fruit ripening
 ATL C3.1H 
Review your knowledge of phytohormones and how they coordinate 
plant growth, development and response to the environment. Use this 
site to help you:  
www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/plantgrowth.html
Work with a partner to create a mind map summarizing all your 
knowledge on this topic.
Concept: 
Interaction
The interactions 
between the 
phytohormones 
auxin and cytokinin 
ensure the 
regulation of root 
and shoot growth 
in plants.
	
◆Cytokinin: 
phytohormone that 
influences plant growth, 
development and 
physiology, including 
cell division.
	
◆Ethylene: a hormone 
found in plants that 
causes fruit ripening.
9	 Suggest how 
a farmer could 
prevent fruit from 
ripening, so that 
they can get their 
produce from 
the farm to the 
supermarket in the 
best condition.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are examples of branching (dendritic) 
and net-like (reticulate) patterns of 
organization?
2	 What are the consequences of positive 
feedback in biological systems? 
