C3.2   Defence against disease
517
C3.2
Defence against disease
•	 How do body systems recognize pathogens and fight infections?
•	 What factors influence the incidence of disease in populations?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C3.2.1 	 Pathogens as the cause of infectious diseases
	 C3.2.2 	 Skin and mucous membranes as a primary defence
	 C3.2.3 	 Sealing of cuts in skin by blood clotting
	 C3.2.4 	 Differences between the innate immune system and the adaptive 
immune system
	 C3.2.5 	 Infection control by phagocytes
	 C3.2.6 	 Lymphocytes as cells in the adaptive immune system that cooperate to 
produce antibodies
	 C3.2.7 	 Antigens as recognition molecules that trigger antibody production
	 C3.2.8 	 Activation of B-lymphocytes by helper T-lymphocytes
	 C3.2.9 	 Multiplication of activated B-lymphocytes to form clones of antibody-secreting 
plasma cells
	 C3.2.10 	Immunity as a consequence of retaining memory cells
	 C3.2.11 	Transmission of HIV in body fluids
	 C3.2.12 	Infection of lymphocytes by HIV with AIDS as a consequence
	 C3.2.13 	Antibiotics as chemicals that block processes occurring in bacteria but not in 
eukaryotic cells
	 C3.2.14 	Evolution of resistance to several antibiotics in strains of pathogenic bacteria
	 C3.2.15 	Zoonoses as infectious diseases that can transfer from other species to humans
	 C3.2.16 	Vaccines and immunization
	 C3.2.17 	Herd immunity and the prevention of epidemics
	 C3.2.18 	Evaluation of data related to the COVID-19 pandemic
Note: There is no higher-level only content in C3.2.
Pathogens as the cause of infectious diseases
There are many disease-causing organisms that can infect humans. A disease-causing organism is 
known as a pathogen, although typically the term is reserved for viruses, bacteria (eubacteria), fungi 
and protists. Archaea (one of the two domains of prokaryotic organisms – see page 127) are not 
known to cause any diseases in humans. Pathogens may bring disease to healthy organisms through 
infection, leading to disease. Accordingly, there are cells in our blood circulation that have roles in 
defence against communicable (i.e. infectious) diseases.
A disease is caused when another organism or virus particle invades the body and lives there 
parasitically. The pathogen is the invader and the infected organism – a human in this case – is 
known as the host. 
	
◆Pathogen: disease-
causing organism.
	
◆Infection: the process 
of infecting or the state 
of being infected by a 
pathogen.
	
◆Disease: any harmful 
deviation from the normal 
structural or functional 
state of an organism, 
causing illness.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
518
 ATL C3.2A 
Why are there no known archaean pathogens? Is this because they have a special biochemistry 
that excludes them from causing disease, or is it simply that they are a relatively recently known 
group (they were only discovered to be a separate domain about 40 years ago) and that currently 
there is not enough evidence for pathogenic species?
Carry out your own research and write a short article titled ‘Why do archaea not cause disease?’, 
perhaps for a school or college publication.
Pathogens may pass from diseased host to healthy organisms, so these diseases are known as 
infectious or communicable diseases. Generally, disease can be defined as an ‘unhealthy 
condition of the body’, and this rather broad definition includes some distinctly different forms of 
ill-health. For example, ill-health may be caused by unfavourable environmental conditions. Diseases 
of this type are non-infectious or non-communicable diseases, and they include conditions such as 
cardiovascular disease, malnutrition and cancer. Other diseases are genetic in origin, such as 
phenylketonuria (page 733) and Down syndrome (page 658).
 
■World Health Organization (WHO)
Good health is more than the absence of harmful effects of a disease. This point is emphasized by 
the World Health Organization (WHO), which identifies health as a ‘state of complete physical, 
mental and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity’.
The WHO was founded in 1948 and is the United Nations agency responsible for international 
public health. One role of the WHO is to monitor and communicate information on the spread and 
containment of infectious diseases, such as COVID-19.
 
■Pathogens and disease
The range of disease-causing organisms that infect humans includes not only micro-organisms such 
as certain bacteria and fungi, but also some protozoa (single-celled animals), certain invertebrate 
animals in the phyla of flatworms (and roundworms), and many viruses.
Not all bacteria or fungi are parasitic and pathogenic; in fact, only relatively few species are. However, 
no virus can function outside a host organism, so we can say that all viruses are parasitic. Viruses, once 
introduced into a host cell, may take over the machinery of protein and nucleic acid synthesis, and force 
their host cells to manufacture more virus components from which viruses can self-assemble.
Nature of science: Observations
Careful observation can lead to important progress in treating diseases. For example, careful 
observations during nineteenth century epidemics of cholera in London and childbed fever (due to 
an infection after childbirth) in Vienna led to breakthroughs in the control of infectious disease.
In August 1854, an outbreak of cholera in Soho, London, killed 616 people within a month. At that 
time, cholera was a major risk to human health in Britain. It was thought that ‘bad air’ from rotting 
organic matter caused the outbreak and two preceding ones. John Snow, a doctor, mapped the 
deaths from cholera and observed that the people who had died had mainly lived near to a water 
pump on Broad Street, a road in Soho. His observations convinced the local council to remove the 
handle from the water pump to prevent its use. As a result, the number of deaths from cholera 
reduced significantly. Later, it was discovered that the water from that pump had been polluted 
by sewage from a nearby pit used to dispose of human waste, including faeces, which had been 
contaminated with the cholera bacterium.
	
◆Infectious or 
communicable 
disease: disease capable 
of being transmitted from 
one organism to another.
Link
The structure of 
viruses and how they 
invade host cells is 
described in Chapter 
A2.3, page 88.
1	 State the 
differences in 
structure between 
a bacterial cell and 
a virus.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
519
In the nineteenth century, many women died after childbirth from puerperal septicaemia, more 
commonly known as childbed fever. Ignaz Semmelweis, a Hungarian physician, was a medical 
student at the University of Vienna’s School of Medicine and at its teaching hospital, the General 
Hospital. In 1840, the hospital’s general maternity ward had two sections: the first ward where 
male medical students delivered the babies and the second ward where female midwives performed 
the deliveries. Semmelweis, while working as an assistant obstetrician (a doctor specializing in 
pregnancy and childbirth) in the maternity ward, observed more deaths from puerperal septicaemia 
occurred in the first ward compared to the second. He also observed that the medical students 
spent their mornings in the autopsy rooms, dissecting and examining the bodies of women who 
had died of childbed fever. They then moved into the maternity ward, often without washing their 
hands. The midwives did not carry out autopsies. He found a clear correlation between deaths and 
autopsies. He believed that ‘particles’ were being transferred from the dead bodies to the mothers 
in the maternity wards, causing infection. In 1847, Semmelweis proposed that anyone delivering 
a baby should wash their hands beforehand, to prevent transmission. In many respects, his idea 
was close to the truth, and was accurate enough for him to devise a method of prevention. Today, 
it is known that childbed fever is caused by a bacterium, and so washing hands helps to prevent 
transmission of this microbe. 
TOK
How is current knowledge shaped by its historical development?
Germ theory is the theory that certain diseases are caused by infection of the body by 
micro‑organisms. Prior to the development of this theory, scientists thought that diseases such as 
cholera were caused by exposure to ‘bad air’. The basis for germ theory was developed by Ignaz 
Semmelweis. Despite his conclusion that childbed fever could be prevented by hand washing, his 
observations conflicted with the established scientific and medical opinions of the time and so 
his ideas were rejected by the medical community, leading to further deaths. It was only when 
French microbiologist Louis Pasteur confirmed germ theory by proving that infection was caused by 
microbes, and Joseph Lister, acting on Pasteur’s research, developed antiseptic methods for surgery, 
that hygienic methods were introduced into medical procedures.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Skin and mucous membranes 
as a primary defence
The skin and the mucous membranes (the internal linings of the lungs, trachea and gut) are the 
primary defence against pathogens that cause infectious diseases. Not surprisingly, protective 
measures have evolved at these surfaces. 
 
■The skin
The skin acts as both a physical and chemical barrier to pathogens (Figure C3.2.1). The external skin 
is covered by keratinized protein of the dead cells of the epidermis. This is a tough and impervious 
layer, and an effective barrier to most organisms unless the surface is broken, cut or deeply scratched. 
Periodic shedding of the epidermis removes microbes. However, folds or creases in the skin that are 
permanently moist may become the home of micro-organisms that degrade this barrier and cause 
infection, such as athlete’s foot.
	
◆Mucous membranes 
(mucosa): the inner 
lining of some organs 
and body cavities (e.g. 
the nose, mouth, lungs 
and intestines). Glands in 
the mucous membrane 
make mucus.
	
◆Primary defence: the 
initial barriers to prevent 
pathogens from causing 
infection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
520
pathogens
are kept out
skin
cells
Gaps between cells
are filled with lipid
so that they form a
strong skin barrier.
The dead keratin cells
(dead skin cells) located
in the outermost skin are
connected to each other.
lipid-rich
matrix
 
■Figure C3.2.1 The skin is a protective barrier
Lysozyme is an enzyme secreted by the skin during perspiration (sweating), which acts as a chemical 
defence breaking down the cell walls of bacteria, thus acting as an antibiotic.
 
■Mucous membranes
The internal surfaces of our breathing apparatus (the trachea, bronchi and bronchioles) and the gut 
are all lined by moist epithelial cells (mucous membranes, also known as mucosa). These vulnerable 
internal barriers are protected by the secretion of large quantities of mucus.
Cilia are organelles that project from the surface of certain cells (Chapter A2.2, page 76). Cilia 
occur in large numbers on the lining (epithelium) of the air tubes (bronchi) serving the lungs 
(Figure C3.2.2). Here, they sweep the fluid mucus across the epithelial surface, away from the 
delicate air sacs of the lungs.
layer of mucus
cilia
cilia
epithelial
cells
mucus
pathogens
to mouth
cilated epithelial
cell
goblet cell
layer of mucus
 
■Figure C3.2.2 Mucous membrane in the trachea
Sealing of cuts in skin by blood clotting
When a blood vessel is ruptured, the blood-clotting mechanism is activated. This leads to localized 
clotting of blood and further blood loss is prevented. A significant fall in blood pressure is also 
prevented, whether at small haemorrhages or at larger breakages or other wounds. The clot also 
reduces the chances of invasion by disease-causing organisms. After that, repair of the damaged 
tissues can take place.
The formation of a blood clot is triggered by a ‘cascade’ of events at the site of a broken blood vessel 
(shown in Figure C3.2.3). The steps are as follows.
l	 Firstly, platelets collect at the site. These components of the blood are formed in the bone 
marrow (along with the red and white blood cells) and they are circulated throughout the body, 
suspended in the plasma. Platelets are actually cell fragments, disc-shaped and very small (only 
2 μm in diameter) – too small to contain a nucleus. Each platelet consists of a sack of cytoplasm 
that is rich in vesicles containing enzymes, and is surrounded by a plasma membrane. Platelets 
stick to the damaged tissues and clump together there – at this point, they change shape from 
sacks to flattened discs with tiny projections that interlock. This action alone seals off the 
smallest breaks.
Top tip!
While the structure 
and function of 
the skin need to be 
appreciated, you do 
not have to be able to 
draw or label diagrams 
of the skin.
	
◆Mucus: a watery 
solution of glycoprotein 
with protective and 
lubrication functions.
	
◆Cilium (plural, 
cilia): motile, hair-
like outgrowth from 
the surface of certain 
eukaryotic cells, which 
move rhythmically to 
propel objects such as 
mucus in the trachea and 
eggs in oviducts.
Common 
mistake
Do not use poor 
terminology to describe 
the reasons for 
clotting, such as ‘stops 
diseases getting in’. 
The stronger answer 
is to say that ‘clotting 
prevents the entrance 
of pathogens’.
	
◆Platelets: tiny cell 
fragments found in 
the blood that lack a 
nucleus; they are involved 
in the blood-clotting 
mechanism.
2	 Suggest how 
mucus secreted by 
the airways may 
protect lung tissue.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
521
l	 Next the collecting platelets release a clotting factor (a protein called thromboplastin that is also 
released by damaged tissues at the site). This clotting factor, along with vitamin K and calcium 
ions (always present in the plasma), causes a soluble plasma protein called prothrombin to be 
converted to an active, proteolytic enzyme, thrombin.
l	 The action of the enzyme thrombin is to convert another soluble blood protein, fibrinogen, 
into insoluble fibrin fibres at the site of the cut. Within this mass of fibres, red blood cells 
(erythrocytes) are trapped, and the blood clot has formed.  
damaged blood vessel
exposed collagen fibres
and damaged endothelium
release clotting factor
(thromboplastin) from
damaged tissue
clotting factor
(thromboplastin)
thrombin
(proteolytic enzyme)
prothrombin
(soluble protein
in plasma)
insoluble
fibrin fibr
+
es
fibrinogen
(plasma protein)
fibrin fibres
trapped blood cells
blood clot
platelets collect,
adhere and release
platelet plug formed
– sufficient to block
minor breaks
local acting
hormones
(prostaglandins)
Ca2+ and vitamin K
from plasma
constriction of damaged vessel
stabilized plug
   prevents further blood loss
   prevents entry of bacteria
 
■Figure C3.2.3 The blood-clotting mechanism
Concept: Interaction
The blood-clotting mechanism depends on the interaction of several different 
components: release of clotting factors from platelets, the subsequent cascade pathway 
that results in rapid conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin by thrombin, the trapping of 
erythrocytes to form a clot.
Common 
mistake
Do not mix up fibrin 
and fibrinogen. Make 
sure you know the 
function and properties 
of both. Learn the 
cascade events of 
clotting carefully.
3	 Identify the correct sequence of the following events during blood clotting: fibrin 
formation; clotting factor release; thrombin formation.
scanning electron micrograph of
blood clot showing meshwork of
fibrin fibres and trapped blood cells


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
522
Differences between the innate immune 
system and the adaptive immune system
The immune response is our main defence once invasion of the body by harmful micro-organisms or 
‘foreign’ materials has occurred. The immune response begins with a first response from the innate 
immune system, carried out by phagocytes (a type of white blood cell) that can engulf and destroy 
(by phagocytosis) many different foreign organisms.
At the same time, the primary phase of the adaptive immune system response begins, involving 
specialized white blood cells called lymphocytes. This is followed by the secondary phase of the 
adaptive immune system response, where specific white blood cells retain a memory of a specific 
pathogen so that a rapid immune response can be quickly coordinated if reinfection occurs.
The innate immune system is different to the adaptive immune system: it responds to a broad range 
of pathogens and does not change over an organism’s life. On the other hand, the adaptive system 
responds in a certain way to individual types of pathogen. It builds up a memory of the pathogens 
that are encountered. This means the immune response becomes more effective.
Top tip!
White blood cells are called leucocytes. These cells are divided into two groups: phagocytes that 
engulf foreign organisms, and lymphocytes that are involved in the adaptive immune system. 
Both circulate in the blood and are contained in lymph nodes.
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Drawing annotated diagrams from observation 
Examine the appearance of the types of white blood cells observed in a blood smear 
preparation.
Draw and fully annotate some of the blood cells you observe (e.g. phagocytes, 
lymphocytes and red blood cells), making clear the differences between them.
Infection control by phagocytes 
Certain white blood cells have the role of engulfing foreign material, including invading bacterial 
cells. Some of these white blood cells are short-lived cells of the plasma. Others are the long-lived, 
rubbish-collecting cells found throughout the body tissues. Both types of cell take up material into 
their cytoplasm, much as the protozoan Amoeba is observed to feed, by phagocytosis (Figure C3.2.4). 
Amoeboid movement (crawling-like movement using protrusions of cytoplasm) allows phagocytes to 
move from blood to sites of infection, where they recognize pathogens, engulf them by endocytosis 
and digest them in a controlled way using enzymes from lysosomes (page 71).
	
◆Innate immune 
system: responds to 
broad categories of 
pathogens and does 
not change during an 
organism’s life.
	
◆Phagocytes: white 
blood cells that engulf, 
absorb and digest 
pathogens, foreign 
particles and cell debris.
	
◆Adaptive immune 
system: responds 
in a specific way to 
particular pathogens and 
builds up a memory of 
pathogens encountered, 
so the immune response 
becomes more effective.
	
◆Lymphocytes: white 
blood cells in the adaptive 
immune system that 
cooperate to produce 
antibodies.
	
◆Plasma: the clear, 
yellowish, liquid part of 
the blood that carries 
blood cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
523
phagocytic leucocyte
detects presence of
bacterium
trapped bacterium engulfed
into a food vacuole in the
cytoplasm of leucocyte
bacterium is broken up into its 
constituent molecules, and these 
are dispersed into the cytoplasm
‘rubbish-collecting’ leucocytes are
distributed widely in the body
– they engulf larger debris and
damaged cells, and dispose of them
bacterium becomes attached to 
receptor molecules on the 
plasma membrane of leucocyte
lysosomes in the cytoplasm 
fuse with the vacuole and 
discharge hydrolytic enzymes
 
■Figure C3.2.4 Phagocytosis of a bacterium
Lymphocytes – the adaptive immune system
Lymphocytes are responsible for our specific immune response. These cells make up 20% of the 
white blood cells circulating in the blood plasma (or in the tissue fluid – phagocytes can move freely 
through the walls of blood vessels). Lymphocytes circulate in the blood and are contained in lymph 
nodes, which are part of the lymphatic system. 
Lymphocytes can detect any foreign matter that enters from outside the body (macromolecules, as 
well as micro-organisms) as different from our own cells and proteins (see below).
There are two types of lymphocyte at work in our immune system: the B-lymphocytes (B-cells) 
and T-lymphocytes (T-cells). Both cell types originate in the bone marrow, where they are formed 
from stem cells (page 257). As they mature, these cells undergo different development processes in 
preparation for their distinctive roles (Figure C3.2.5).
cell division
(mitosis)
cell matures
into lymphocyte
T-cell migration
during maturation
thymus gland where
T-lymphocytes that
react to body’s own
cells are destroyed
lymph nodes occur
all over the body but
are concentrated in
the neck, arm pits 
and groin
stem cell of
bone marrow
B-cell matures in
bone marrow
T-lymphocyte awaits chance 
encounter with an antigen
B-lymphocyte awaits chance 
encounter with an antigen
mature lymphocytes 
circulate in the blood 
system, escape into
the tissue fluid 
surrounding body cells, 
and collect in the lymph 
system; many are stored 
in lymph nodes
repeated
B-lymphocytes are activated by T-lymphocytes
 
■Figure C3.2.5 T- and B-lymphocytes
	
◆B-lymphocytes 
(B-cells): lymphocytes 
that produce antibodies 
and are responsible for 
presenting antigens to 
T-cells. Once activated, 
they can mature into 
plasma cells or memory 
B-lymphocytes.
	
◆T-lymphocytes 
(T-cells): white blood 
cells processed by 
the thymus that are 
responsible for cell-
mediated immunity.
Link
The lymphatic system 
is discussed in more 
detail in Chapter B3.2, 
page 312.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
524
 
■T-lymphocytes
T-lymphocytes leave the bone marrow soon after they have been formed and migrate to the thymus 
gland. The thymus gland is found in the chest, just below the breastbone (sternum). It is active and 
enlarged during the early stages of our growth and development. While the T-cells are present in the 
thymus gland, all of those that would react to the body’s own cells are removed and destroyed. 
The surviving T-cells are released and circulate in the blood plasma. Many are stored in lymph 
nodes. The thymus gland shrinks in size by the time puberty is reached, its task completed.
Top tip!
Remember that antibodies are proteins that are produced by B-lymphocytes to attach to foreign, 
non-self material and allow the immune system to remove it. Antigens are substances (usually 
glycoproteins or other protein) capable of binding specifically to an antibody.
 
■B-lymphocytes
B-lymphocytes complete their maturation in the bone marrow, prior to circulating in the blood. 
Many of these lymphocytes are also stored in lymph nodes. The role of the majority of B-cells, after 
activation by T-cells, is to form clones of plasma cells that then secrete antibodies into the blood 
system. In addition, memory cells are formed – see page 529. 
An individual has a very large number of B-lymphocytes that each make a specific type of antibody.
4	 Explain the significance of the role of the thymus gland in destroying T-cells that would 
otherwise react to ‘self’ body proteins.
 
■Antibodies
An antibody is a globular protein called an immunoglobulin. It is made of four polypeptide chains 
held together by disulfide bridges (-S–S-) and forming a Y-shaped molecule (see Figure C3.2.6). 
The top of each ‘arm’ contains an antigen binding site. 
simplified form
antigen
antigen binding site
of specific amino acid residues in a unique
sequence to which an antigen may fit 
polypeptides
light chain × 2 
heavy chain × 2
disulfide
bridges (–S–S–)
antigen
antibodies occur
attached to cell
surface membrane
of B-lymphocytes  
and
may be secreted by exocytosis as
free-standing molecules
 
■Figure C3.2.6 The structure of an antibody
Millions of different types of antibodies may be produced by our bodies, each by a different type of 
lymphocyte – there are as many antibodies as there are types of foreign matter (antigens) invading 
the body. The amino acid sequence of the antigen binding site in the ‘fork’ region differs according to 
the chemistry of the antibody it binds with and is unique to that antibody. It is the antigen binding 
site that gives each antibody its specificity. 
	
◆Thymus gland: a small 
organ that lies in the upper 
chest under the breastbone 
in which T-lymphocytes 
grow, multiply and mature; 
it is part of the lymphatic 
system.
	
◆Plasma cells: type of 
immune cell that makes 
large amounts of a 
specific antibody. Plasma 
cells develop from B-cells 
that have been activated.
	
◆Memory cells: a 
long-lived lymphocyte 
capable of responding 
to a particular antigen 
on its reintroduction, 
long after the exposure 
that stimulated its initial 
production.
	
◆Immunoglobulin: 
a protein made by 
B-lymphocytes and 
plasma cells that helps the 
body fight infection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
525
Antibodies initially occur attached to the cell surface membrane of B-cells, but later are mass-
produced and secreted by cells derived from the B-cell. This occurs after that B-cell has undergone 
an activation step (see page 526). A huge range of different antibody-secreting lymphocytes exists, 
each type recognizing one specific antigen. The more antigens we encounter, the more antibodies we 
are able to form, should they be required.
Antibodies destroy antigens in different ways (Table C3.2.1). Toxins may be inactivated by reaction with 
the antibody, and bacterial cells may be clumped together so that they ‘precipitate’ and can be engulfed 
by phagocytic cells. Antibodies also attach to foreign matter, ensuring its recognition by phagocytic 
cells. Alternatively, antibodies can act by destroying bacterial cell walls, causing lysis of the bacterium.
 
■Table C3.2.1 How antibodies aid the destruction of pathogens
Agglutination
antibodies attach to pathogens, causing them to stick together – clumped in this way, they 
are more easily ingested by phagocytic cells
Complement 
activation
complement proteins in the plasma cause cell lysis by destroying the plasma membrane of 
pathogen cells, after antibodies have identified them by binding
Toxin 
neutralization
antibodies bind to toxins in the plasma, preventing them from affecting susceptible cells
Opsonization
antibodies make pathogens instantly recognizable by binding to them, and then linking 
them to phagocytic cells 
Antigens 
The immune system can recognize ‘self’ – our body’s cells and proteins – and tell them apart from 
foreign or ‘non-self’ substances, such as those on or from an invading organism. Any molecule 
that the body recognizes as foreign or ‘non-self’ is known as an antigen. Most antigens are 
glycoproteins or other proteins, and they are usually located on the outer surfaces of pathogens.  
It is the lymphocytes that can recognize antigens and take steps to overcome them. The specificity  
of antigens allows for responses that are customized to specific pathogens.
Each type of lymphocyte in our body recognizes only one specific antigen. In the presence of that 
antigen (and only that antigen), the lymphocyte divides rapidly, producing many cells known as 
clones. These cloned lymphocytes then secrete an antibody specific to that antigen (see below). 
Antigens on the surface of red blood cells (erythrocytes) may stimulate antibody production if 
transfused into a person with a different blood group. 
 
■How are ‘self’ and ‘non-self’ recognized?
Every organism has unique molecules on the surface of their cells. Cells are identified by these 
specific molecules (markers) that are lodged in the outer surface of the plasma membrane. These 
molecules include the highly variable glycoproteins on the cell surface membrane. Remember, 
carbohydrates occur attached to proteins here. 
The glycoproteins that identify cells are known as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
antigens. In humans, the genes for MHC antigens are on chromosome 6. The MHC antigens of 
individuals are genetically determined – they are a feature we inherit. In inherited characteristics that 
are products of sexual reproduction, variations occur, so each of us has distinctive MHC antigens 
present on our cell surface membranes. Unless you have an identical twin, your MHC antigens 
are unique. 
Lymphocytes of our immune system have antigen receptors that recognize our own MHC antigens 
and can tell them apart from any foreign antigens detected in the body. It is critically important that 
our own cells are not attacked by our immune system. This is the basis of the ‘self’ and ‘non-self’ 
recognition mechanism.
Link
The definition of 
antigen is discussed in 
cell–cell recognition 
in Chapter B1.1, 
page 195.
Link
Blood groups and 
immune reactions 
are examined 
in Chapter B1.1, 
page 195.
Link
Glycoproteins and 
glycolipids in the 
plasma membrane are 
covered in Chapter 
B2.1, page 234.
	
◆Major 
histocompatibility 
complex (MHC): 
group of genes that 
code for proteins found 
on the surfaces of cells 
that help the immune 
system recognize foreign 
substances.
5	 Identify where 
antigens and 
antibodies may be 
found in the body.
6	 Deduce which 
synthetic 
machinery in 
the lymphocytes 
is active in the 
production of the 
components of 
their antibodies.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
526
Steps to the immune response
When an infection occurs, the white blood cell population immediately increases and many of these 
cells collect at the site of the invasion. The complex response to infection has begun. 
The roles of T- and B-cells in this response are as listed here (see also Figure C3.2.7). 
 
■Activation of B-lymphocytes by helper T-lymphocytes
Top tip!
T- and B-cells have molecules on the outer surface of their cell surface membrane that enable 
them to recognize antigens, but each B- and T-lymphocyte has only one type of surface receptor. 
Consequently, each lymphocyte can recognize only one type of antigen.
Concept: Interdependence
There are coordinated interactions between helper T-cells and B-cells that occur during 
the initiation and refinement of antibody production.
1	 When a specific antigen enters the body, B-cells with surface receptors (antibodies) that 
recognize the antigen bind to it.
2	 On binding to the B-cell, the antigen is taken into the cytoplasm by endocytosis. Then it is 
expressed and displayed on the cell surface membrane of the B-cell (this is known as an 
antigen-specific B-cell).
3	 Meanwhile phagocytic cells, the macrophages, engulf any antigens they encounter. 
(Macrophages occur in the plasma, lymph or tissue fluid, liver, spleen and alveoli.) Macrophages 
(and T-cells) secrete cytokines, small signalling molecules (usually a protein or glycoprotein) 
that act on neighbouring cells to alter their behaviour. This assists with the immune response 
(Chapter C2.1, page 454). Once antigens have been taken up, they are presented externally, 
attached to the HMC antigens, on the surface of the macrophages. T-cells respond to antigens 
that are presented on the surface of other cells, as on the macrophages. This is called antigen 
presentation by a macrophage.
4	 As T-cells encounter these macrophages and briefly bind to them, they are immediately activated. 
They are now called ‘armed’ or activated helper T-cells.
5	 Activated helper T-cells bind to antigen-specific B-cells with the same antigen expressed on their 
cell surface membrane. As a result, the B-cell is activated. It is now an ‘armed’ or activated B-cell.
Common mistake
Do not confuse the role of T- and B-cells. The role of B-cells is to secrete antibodies. The role of 
helper T-cells is not to secrete antibodies but to further activate B-cells after ‘activation’ by contact 
with antigens of a particular pathogen or other foreign matter.
Top tip!
B-cells become memory cells only when they have been activated. Activation requires both direct 
interaction with the specific antigen and contact with a helper T-cell that has also become activated 
by the same type of antigen.
	
◆Antigen-specific 
B-cell: lymphocytes that 
form either antibody-
secreting cells or memory 
B-cells after infection 
or vaccination.
	
◆Macrophage: type of 
phagocytic white blood 
cell that surrounds and 
kills pathogens, removes 
dead cells and stimulates 
the action of other 
immune system cells.
	
◆Antigen 
presentation: process 
where an antigen is taken 
into a white blood cell 
by receptor-mediated 
endocytosis, digested, 
complexed with MHC 
II molecules and then 
presented on the cell 
surface membrane for 
interaction with T-cells.
	
◆Helper T-cell: 
lymphocyte that 
recognizes a foreign 
antigen and then 
activates T-cell and B-cell 
production.
	
◆Activated B-cell: 
B-cells absorb an antigen 
and present pieces of it on 
their surface via a major 
histocompatibility complex 
(MHC); helper T-cells then 
recognize the antigens 
via the MHC and activate 
the B-cells, resulting in 
B-cell differentiation 
into memory B-cells or 
plasma cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
527
Concept: Interaction
Interactions between B- and T-cells coordinate the immune response and facilitate 
antibody production for a specific pathogen.
Top tip!
Phagocytes, such as 
macrophages, have 
the capacity to leave 
blood vessels.
Common mistake
Do not confuse the functions of macrophages, B-cells, T-cells and memory cells. Use Figure C3.2.7 
to help you learn the role of each different type of cell and the processes involved in the 
immune response.
antibodies overcome antigen
e.g. by neutralizing it, by causing clumping together of 
cells to aid engulfing by other macrophages, or by 
precipitation of soluble antigens
each plasma cell packed with ER now 
mass-produces antibody molecules and secretes 
them by exocytosis
activation
activation
6 activated B-cell
   divides rapidly,
   forming a clone
   of plasma cells
4 T-cell binds (briefly) to macrophage that 
presents an antigen and is activated – it is 
now called an activated helper T-cell
7 some activated B-cells and T-cells
   survive in the body as memory cells,
   and are able to initiate a more speedy
   response in the event of reinfections
MHC = major histocompatibility
complex
All cells have MHC proteins unique to
cells of the organism.
5 activated helper 
   T-cell now binds to 
   B-cell with same antigen 
   expressed – immediately 
   the B-cell is activated 
   = activated B-cell
2 antigen taken up by endocytosis 
and is then expressed on the 
plasma membrane at the MHC 
protein
3 macrophages engulf antigens
   by endocytosis, and then express
   this antigen on their MHC proteins
   on the plasma membrane
   = antigen presentation
1 antigen binds to antibody
   on B-cell plasma membrane
antigen enters body (the required trigger 
to initiate specific antibody production)
T-cells
T-cells respond to antigens
on the surface of other cells
MHC protein
macrophage
B-cells
T-cell
 
■Figure C3.2.7 Stages in antibody production


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
528
 
■Multiplication of activated B-lymphocytes to form clones of 
antibody-secreting plasma cells
6	 After B-cells are activated (step 5), they divide rapidly by mitosis, forming clones of plasma 
cells. An electron micrograph of plasma cells shows each one is packed with rough endoplasmic 
reticulum (RER, Figure C3.2.8). It is in the RER that the antibody is mass-produced and 
exported from the B-cell by exocytosis. The generation of a large number of plasma cells that 
produce one specific antibody type is known as clonal selection.
The antibodies are normally produced in such numbers that the antigen is overcome.  
The action of antibodies is to bind to antigens, neutralizing them or making them clear targets 
for phagocytic cells.
We have noted that the T- and B-cells have molecules on the outer surface of their cell surface 
membrane that enable them to recognize antigens, but each B- and T-lymphocyte has only one 
type of surface receptor. Consequently, each lymphocyte can recognize only one type of antigen.
7	 After antibodies have attacked the foreign matter and the disease threat is overcome, the special 
proteins disappear from the blood and tissue fluid. So, too, do the bulk of the specific B-cells and 
T-cells that were responsible for their formation. 
Top tip!
There are relatively 
small numbers of 
B-cells that respond 
to a specific antigen. 
To produce sufficient 
quantities of antibody, 
activated B-cells first 
divide by mitosis to 
produce large numbers 
of plasma B-cells 
that are capable of 
producing the same 
type of antibody.
Note the cell cytoplasm
is packed with RER
2 µm
 
■Figure C3.2.8 Colourized electron 
micrograph of a plasma cell
red bone marrow
– site of actively
dividing stem cells
blood circulation, tissue fluid
and lymph nodes
B-cell now
carrying
antigen
activated
B-cell
in the presence of a specific antigen,
e.g. an invading pathogenic bacterium
B-cells
T-cells
thymus
gland
cell division to 
form a clone of
plasma cells
antibody secreted,
antigen overcome
antigen
engulfed
memory cells
memory cells
activated
T-cell
activated
macrophage
armed T-cell
becomes
helper T-cell
armed T-cell becomes
cytotoxic cell – destroys
cells infected by a virus
or other cells carrying
antigens, e.g. tumour-
associated antigens (TAA)
of cancer cells
 
■Figure C3.2.9 The roles of 
B- and T-cells in the immune 
system – a summary
It is now helpful to 
summarize the complex 
roles of B- and T-cells in 
the immune system 
(Figure C3.2.9).
7	 Calculate the 
magnification of 
the plasma cell in 
Figure C3.2.8.
8	 Outline the steps 
of an immune 
reaction response 
to an infection, 
and explain how 
and why antibodies 
are produced.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
529
 
■Immunity as a consequence of retaining memory cells
Immunity is the ability to eliminate an infectious disease from the body and to resist an infection by 
a pathogen. Long-lived and specific immunity is the result of the long-term survival of lymphocytes 
that are capable of making the specific antibodies needed to fight the infection. These are memory 
cells, retained after a previous infection by that pathogen. Memory cells are specifically activated 
B-cells. They are long-lived cells, in contrast to plasma cells and other activated B-cells. Memory cells 
make possible an early and effective response in the event of a reinfection of the body by the same 
antigen (Figure C3.2.10). This is the basis of natural immunity (see below).
5 days
5 days
time
response due to memory
cells, i.e. person has
immunity
plasma cells
short-lived
antibody concentration
Memory cells are
retained in lymph nodes.
They allow a quick and
speciﬁc response if the
same antigen reappears.
primary response
to initial infection
secondary response if same
infection (antigen) returns
 
■Figure C3.2.10 Profile of antibody production in infection and reinfection
Common mistake
Explanations of what happens upon second exposure to an antigen are often lacking detail. 
It should be noted that antibodies are produced more rapidly and to a higher level.
HIV
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was first identified in 1983 as the cause of a disease of the 
human immune system known as acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
HIV is a tiny virus, less than 0.1 μm in diameter (Figure C3.2.11). It consists of two single strands of 
RNA which, together with enzymes, are enclosed by a protein capsid. A membrane, derived from the 
human host cell in which the virus was formed, encapsulates each new virus particle (virion) leaving 
the host cell.  
    
	
◆Immunity: resistance 
to the onset of a disease 
after infection by the 
causative agent.
9	 For Figure C3.2.10, 
compare and 
contrast the 
primary response 
following initial 
infection with 
the secondary 
response.
10	Identify the steps 
of plasma cell 
formation that are 
avoided in cases 
of reinfection, due 
to the existence of 
memory cells.
11	State what is 
meant by the term 
immunity.
	
◆HIV (human 
immunodeficiency 
virus): virus that attacks 
the body’s immune system. 
If HIV is not treated, it can 
lead to AIDS.
	
◆AIDS (acquired 
immune deficiency 
syndrome): the name 
used to describe a 
number of potentially 
life-threatening infections 
and illnesses that happen 
when the immune 
system has been severely 
damaged by the HIV virus.
 
■Figure C3.2.11 
Electron micrograph 
of white blood cell 
(blue), from which HIV 
(yellow) is budding off


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
530
HIV is a retrovirus. A retrovirus reverses the normal flow of genetic information from the DNA of 
genes to messenger RNA in the cytoplasm (page 99). The idea that information always flows in this 
direction in cells was called the central dogma of cell biology (implying it was always the case). 
However, in retroviruses, the information in RNA in the cytoplasm is translated into DNA within a 
host cell, which then becomes integrated within the DNA of a chromosome in the host’s nucleus.
 ATL C3.2B 
Explore the life cycle of HIV using this animation:  
www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/lifecyclehiv.html
How does application of your knowledge of cell structure (Chapter A2.2 Cell structure) help in 
understanding how HIV particles are assembled? Make a list of the relevant parts of the syllabus 
that you need to know about to understand the life cycle of HIV and its effects on the body.
 
■Transmission of HIV in body fluids
Infection with HIV is possible through contact with the blood or body fluids of infected people, such 
as may occur during sexual intercourse, sharing of hypodermic needles by intravenous drug users or 
breastfeeding of a newborn baby. Blood transfusions and organ transplants can also transmit HIV, 
but donors are now screened for HIV infection in most countries.  
HIV is not transferred by contact with saliva on a drinking glass, or by sharing a towel, for example. 
Female mosquitoes also do not transmit HIV when feeding on human blood. 
 
■Infection of lymphocytes by HIV with AIDS as a consequence
HIV is an enveloped virus with embedded glycoproteins that act as antigens when the virus is 
present in the human bloodstream. These glycoproteins attach the virus to protein receptors of the 
surface of T-lymphocytes and the core of the virus penetrates to the cytoplasm (Figure C3.2.12) of 
these important regulatory cells of the immune system. Macrophages, another type of white blood 
cell, may also be infected by HIV.
T-lymphocyte
HIV particle
CD4 receptor
binding protein 
on virus capsule
binding leads 
to fusion of 
capsule with 
cell surface 
membrane
virus core enters 
lymphocyte
HIV antigens 
remain on 
surface of 
infected cell
1
2
3
 
■Figure C3.2.12 HIV infection of host cell: CD4 T-helper cells
	
◆Retrovirus: a virus 
that has RNA as its nucleic 
acid and uses the enzyme 
reverse transcriptase to 
copy its genome into the 
DNA of the host cell’s 
chromosomes.
Common 
mistake
It is incorrect to 
say that AIDS is 
transmitted. HIV is 
transmitted, not AIDS. 
HIV is the virus and 
AIDS is the disease 
it causes. 
Link
Retroviruses are 
covered in Chapter 
A2.3, page 99.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
531
Newly synthesized HIV virions leave the host cell by lysis and will then invade and kill other 
lymphocytes (Figure C3.2.13).
Without treatment, this process causes the body’s reserve of 
lymphocytes to decrease very quickly. Macrophages also form an 
important reservoir of HIV.
The reduction in the number of active lymphocytes means the body 
loses the ability to produce antibodies. Eventually, no infection, 
however trivial, can be resisted; death follows. This is why AIDS 
is known as an ‘immunodeficiency syndrome’. Only certain types 
of lymphocyte are infected and killed, but a reduction in these 
lymphocytes limits the body’s ability to produce antibodies and 
fight opportunistic infections, leading to AIDS.
Ideally, a vaccine against HIV would be the best solution – one 
designed to remove both infected lymphocytes and HIV particles 
in the patient’s bloodstream. The work of several laboratories is 
dedicated to this solution. The problem is that, in the latent state 
of the infection, the infected lymphocyte cells frequently change 
their membrane marker proteins because of the presence of the HIV 
genome within the cell. Effectively, HIV can hide from the body’s 
immune response by changing its identity.
12	Figure C3.2.14 shows changes in the number of helper 
T-cells and HIV RNA copies in blood samples of a 
person infected by HIV. Analyse the graph shown in 
Figure C3.2.14.
a	 Describe the trend seen in the graph.
b	 Explain the trend seen in the graph.
normal 
range for
T-lymphocyte
signiﬁcantly 
depressed 
T-lymphocytes
severe T-lymphocyte 
depletion
initial 
infection
early 
symptoms
opportunistic infection
(e.g. pneumonia) 
takes over – patient’s 
immune system now 
hopelessly compromised  
death
weeks
years
Key
CD4 helper T-cells per mm3 
of blood
HIV RNA copies per mm3 
of blood
0 3
9
6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
 
■Figure C3.2.14 Profile of an AIDS infection
genes of 
HIV on host
chromosome
viral proteins and RNA being synthesised and new HIV ‘cores’
assembled then budded off with part of the host cell surface
membrane as the capsules
the ‘budding’ process
copy of
viral RNA
cell surface
membrane
becomes the
virus capsule
RNA core
formed
viral
proteins
formed
messenger
RNA copy
to ribosomes
 
■Figure C3.2.13 Activation of the HIV genome 
and production of newly replicated HIV virions


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
532
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Physical modelling
https://pdb101.rcsb.org/learn/paper-models/hiv-capsid
https://cdn.rcsb.org/pdb101/learn/resources/structural-biology-of-hiv/index.html#
The first URL provides a template and video for making an HIV capsid paper model 
and the second URL allows you to explore the structural biology of HIV (viral enzymes, 
accessory proteins and structural proteins). 
Antibiotics 
Antibiotics are substances that slow down or kill micro-organisms. They are obtained from fungi or 
bacteria and are substances that these organisms manufacture in their natural habitats. An antibiotic, 
when present in low concentrations, inhibits the growth of other micro-organisms. Many bacterial 
diseases of humans and other animals can be successfully treated with them.
Before antibiotics became available to treat bacterial infections, typical hospital wards were filled with 
patients with pneumonia, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, meningitis, syphilis and rheumatic fever. These 
bacterial diseases claimed many lives, sometimes very quickly. Patients of all ages were affected.  
Today, these infections are not the ‘killers’ they once were here. For example, in the 1930s about 40% 
of the patients with bacterial pneumonia died of the disease. Today, about 5–10% may die. Antibiotic 
drugs have brought about this improvement in survival rates. The viral forms of pneumonia and 
meningitis are not overcome by antibiotics, however, since antibiotics do not affect viruses. 
 
■The discovery of penicillin – the first antibiotic
In 1929, Alexander Fleming (1881–1955), a Scottish bacteriologist working at St Mary’s Hospital, 
Paddington, London, was studying the bacterium Staphylococcus, which causes boils and sore 
throats. When examining some older bacteriological plates, he came across one in which a fungal 
colony had also become established (Figure C3.2.15). He noticed that the bacteria were killed in 
areas surrounding the mould. This he identified as Penicillium notatum. He cultured this mould in 
broth and discovered that a substance from it – which he named penicillin – was bactericidal. He 
also showed that penicillin did not harm human blood cells. Fleming published these results in a 
scientific paper. 
Nature of science: Global impact of science 
Early testing of the safety of penicillin as a drug
The leading figures in the development of penicillin were Australian pathologist Harold Florey 
(1898–1968) and German biochemist Ernst Chain (1906–79). This team isolated penicillin in a stable 
form for therapeutic uses.
Florey and Chain used mice to test penicillin on bacterial infections in an experiment that today 
would not be compliant with drug-testing protocols (Figure C3.2.15). Can you see why? Today, 
scientists have an obligation to assess the risks associated with their work, and these same 
standards are recognized internationally. 
	
◆Antibiotics: chemicals 
that block processes 
occurring in bacteria but 
not in eukaryotic cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
533
Since their original discovery, over 4000 different antibiotics have been isolated, but only about 
50 have proved to be safe to use as drugs. The antibiotics that are effective over a wide range of 
pathogenic organisms are called broad-spectrum antibiotics. Others are effective with just a 
few pathogens. Many antibiotics in use today are semi-synthetic (i.e. made by converting starting 
materials from natural sources into final products via chemical reactions), as they can act against 
bacteria that are resistant to the original compound, have a greater spectrum of activity or cause 
fewer side effects.
4 mice were given
no further treatment
4 mice were also 
given penicillin
all 4 mice died
all 4 mice survived
A Petri dish with sterile nutrient agar, set up
for culturing a micro-organism
Florey and Chain’s experiment to test penicillin on a bacterial infection in mice
8 mice were injected
with a lethal suspension
of bacteria
The Petri dish that Alexander Fleming
noticed in his laboratory
sterile inoculating loop
is first dipped into a
culture of micro-organisms
sterilized nutrient
agar prepared
Staphylococcus colonies 
on sterilized culture 
medium
area where bacterial
colonies have been
killed
mould (Penicillium notatum)
accidently infected the plate
with lid raised, the nutrient
agar plate is streaked
 
■Figure C3.2.15 Early steps in the discovery and use of penicillin as an antibiotic
 ATL C3.2C 
Find out about 
how modern drugs 
are tested.
Suggest possible 
reasons why Florey 
and Chain’s tests on 
the safety of penicillin 
would not be compliant 
with current protocols 
on drug testing.
 
■How antibiotics work
Most antibiotics disrupt the metabolism of prokaryotic cells – whole populations of bacteria may be 
quickly suppressed. The division and growth phases of bacteria are vulnerable to antibiotic action 
(Table C3.2.2). At the same time, the cells of the human host organism (a eukaryote) are not affected.
 
■Table C3.2.2 The biochemical mechanisms of antibiotic action
Mechanism targeted
Effects
Cell wall synthesis
The antibiotic interferes with the synthesis of bacterial cell walls. Once the cell wall 
is destroyed, the delicate plasma membrane of the bacterium is exposed to the 
destructive force generated by excessive uptake of water by osmosis so that lysis 
(bursting) of the cell occurs. Several antibiotics, including penicillin, ampicillin and 
bacitracin, bind to and inactivate specific wall-building enzymes – the bacterium’s 
walls fall apart. (This is the most effective mechanism.)
Protein synthesis 
The antibiotic inhibits protein synthesis by binding with ribosomal RNA. The 
ribosomes of prokaryotes are made of particular RNA subunits. The ribosomes 
of eukaryotic cells are larger and are built with different types of RNA molecules. 
Antibiotics such as streptomycin, chloramphenicol, the tetracyclines and 
erythromycin all bind to the prokaryotic ribosomal RNA subunits that are unique to 
bacteria, terminating their protein synthesis.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
534
Viruses, on the other hand, are non-living particles and have no metabolism of their own, so have no 
function that can be inhibited by antibiotics. Viruses reproduce using metabolic pathways in their 
host cell. Antibiotics cannot be used to prevent viral diseases.
13	Explain why antibiotics are effective against bacteria but not viruses.
Common mistake
It is incorrect to say that antibiotics are not effective against viruses because these can ‘hide inside 
the host cell’. Antibiotics are ineffective against viruses because they affect bacterial enzymes 
and cell wall synthesis, neither of which viruses have, so antibiotics should not be taken to treat 
viral infections.
Concept: Interaction
Antibiotics interact with prokaryotic cells by disrupting their metabolism, either by 
interfering with the synthesis of bacterial cell walls or by inhibiting protein synthesis by 
binding with ribosomal RNA.
Evolution of antibiotic resistance
Evolution by natural selection is the process by which genetic variation in organisms is selected for 
by their environment, ultimately leading to speciation. This theory helps to explain the development 
of antibiotic resistance in bacteria.
Patients who are infected with a bacterium are treated with an antibiotic to help them overcome the 
disease; antibiotics are very widely used. In a large population of that bacterium, some individual 
bacteria may carry a gene for resistance to the antibiotic in question, typically on a plasmid. Such 
genes sometimes arise by spontaneous mutation or may be acquired through conjugation between 
bacteria of different populations (see page 119).
Most of a bacteria population is not adapted to an environment that has changed (with the addition 
of an antibiotic), but an unusual or mutant variety of the population is suited and, therefore, has 
a selective advantage. The resistant bacteria in the population have no selective advantage in the 
absence of the antibiotic and must compete for resources with non-resistant bacteria. But when 
the antibiotic is present, most bacteria of the population will be killed. The resistant bacteria are 
very likely to survive and will be the basis of the future population. In the new population, all 
individuals now carry the gene for resistance to the antibiotic. The genome has changed abruptly 
(Figure C3.2.16). The evolution of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics means that careful use of 
antibiotics is necessary to slow the emergence of multi-resistant bacteria. 
Link
Evolution by natural 
selection is covered 
in Chapter A4.1, page 
140 and Chapter D4.1, 
page 779.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
535
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
In the long term, the drugs industry faces
the challenge of producing new antibiotics
faster than antibiotic-resistant bacteria evolve.
overuse and misuse of antibiotics create the
perfect breeding ground for resistant bacteria
development of multiple-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, 1992–2001
(% of infected samples received in pathology labs)
process is repeated in another
antibiotic-treated host
(following another infection
and treatment with a different
antibiotic, e.g. methicillin),
causing multiple-antibiotic-
resistant bacteria to evolve
pathogenic bacteria
pathogen invades and triggers disease
in human (or in a pet or farm animals)
cell carries gene for resistance
to an antibiotic (bacterium
able to inactivate antibiotic)
antibiotic-resistant gene acquired
by mutation
or
by conjugation (a form of sexual
reproduction) with a bacterial
cell that carries the gene
or
when infected by a virus
(phage) that has picked up
the gene in another host
treated with antibiotic, e.g. penicillin
most bacterial cells perish
but
antibiotic-resistant cell survives
gives rise to a new population of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria
(non-resistant competitor
bacteria have been killed,
so there is no competition 
for resources)
40
%
30
20
10
0
 
■Figure C3.2.16 Multiple antibiotic resistance in bacteria, where there is evolution 
of resistance to several antibiotics in strains of pathogenic bacteria
For example, a strain of Staphylococcus aureus has acquired resistance to a range of antibiotics 
including methicillin, forming the so-called methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). 
MRSA presents the greatest threat to patients who have undergone surgery. With cases of MRSA, the 
intravenous antibiotic called vancomycin is prescribed, but recently there have been cases of partial 
resistance to this drug, too.
Similarly, a strain of the bacterium Clostridium difficile is now resistant to all but two antibiotics. 
This bacterium is a natural component of our gut ‘microflora’. It is only when C. difficile’s activities 
are no longer suppressed by the surrounding, hugely beneficial (‘friendly’) gut flora that it may 
multiply to life-threatening numbers, triggering toxic damage to the colon. Suppression of beneficial 
gut bacteria is a typical consequence of heavy doses of broad-spectrum antibiotics, administered to 
overcome infections of other superbugs.
14	Explain:
a	 why doctors 
ask patients to 
complete the 
full course of 
antibiotics, even 
if they start to 
feel better. 
b	 why the 
medical 
profession tries 
to combat 
resistance by 
alternating 
the types of 
antibiotic used 
against an 
infection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
536
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour
The development of new techniques can lead to new avenues of research. For example, the 
discovery of penicillin and its subsequent development as an antibiotic used to treat bacterial 
disease, has led to the development of a wide range of antibiotics that target specific bacteria. 
Modern techniques use computer programs (machine-learning algorithms) to survey more than 
a hundred million chemical compounds to pick out potential antibiotics that kill bacteria using 
different mechanisms to those of existing drugs. International efforts have led to the development 
of chemical libraries that can be surveyed in the quest to find new antibiotics. In the face of 
increasing antibiotic resistance, this is also a global effort. Researchers hope to use computer models 
not only to design new antibiotics but also to optimize existing molecules by adding features that 
would make a particular antibiotic target only certain bacteria, preventing it from killing beneficial 
bacteria in a patient’s digestive tract. 
 ATL C3.2D 
Use this site to explore further the range of antibiotics available, and the mechanisms through which 
bacteria can gain resistance: https://cdn.rcsb.org/pdb101/learn/resources/superbugs/index.html
Create a poster that summarizes the range of antibiotics available, and how changes to bacterial 
populations can lead to antibiotics becoming ineffective. 
If bacteria become resistant to all antibiotics, what alternatives are there to stop the development 
of disease?
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Figure C3.2.17 shows the percentage of samples of 
Staphylococcus aureus that were methicillin resistant. 
Analyse the data shown in the graph. 
Interpret the trend seen in the data between 1992 and 
2001; justify your answer with valid reasons.
year
1993
1996
1994
50
0
20
30
40
1992
1997
1995
1998
10
2001
1999
2000
Staphylococcus aureus samples
sent to labs in England and Wales
that are methicillin resistant/%
 
■Figure C3.2.17 The increasing incidence of MRSA
15	Antibiotics are widely used in animal farming, partly to control animal disease, especially 
in intensive agriculture. Suggest what this means, why it happens, and what possible 
dangers could arise? 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
537
One result of bacterial resistance to antibiotics is that the pharmaceutical industry faces the 
challenge of producing new antibiotics faster than bacteria develop resistance to them. However, 
this is proving increasingly difficult – the number of new antibiotics being developed each year has 
fallen dramatically (Table C3.2.3).
 
■Table C3.2.3 The number of new antibiotics developed per 5-year period
1980 – 
1984
1985 – 
1989
1990 – 
1994
1995 – 
1999
2000 – 
2004
2005 – 
2009
2010 – 
2012
Number of new antibiotics 
approved (in USA)
19
11
11
11
4
3
1
Zoonoses
Pathogens are often specific in their choice of host. For example, humans are the only host for the 
pathogens that cause the diseases of syphilis, gonorrhoea, measles and poliomyelitis. 
On the other hand, other pathogens can cross species barriers, infecting a range of hosts. Zoonoses 
are diseases of other animals that can be transmitted to humans. Generally, infectious diseases are 
most often ‘shared’ between species that are closely related and inhabit the same geographic area.
Existing viruses can spread from one host to another. The SARS virus (75% genetic similarity to 
SARS-CoV-2, COVID 19) originated in South East Asia in 2002, where people were infected with a 
coronavirus that originated in bats and spread to humans either directly or indirectly through civet 
cats. The incidence of zoonoses increases when humans exist in close contact with animals and 
when humans encounter animals in new geographical regions.
The prevalence of zoonoses as infectious diseases in humans, and their varied modes of infection, are 
illustrated in the following examples.
 
■Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by a rod-shaped bacterium, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (see Figure C3.2.18). 
In Illinois, USA, three elephants died due to M. tuberculosis from 1994 and 1996. In late 1996, a 
fourth living elephant tested positive for M. tuberculosis. Animal handlers on the farm were tested 
for TB and 11 out of 22 had positive tests, with one having active TB. A comparison of the DNA 
fingerprint from the four elephants and the handler with active TB showed that the TB was the same 
strain. This showed that transmission of M. tuberculosis between humans and elephants was possible.
Although most cases of human TB are caused by M. tuberculosis, zoonotic TB in people is 
predominantly caused by a closely related species, Mycobacterium bovis which causes bovine 
tuberculosis, (bTB). The disease can be transmitted directly by contact with infected domestic and 
wild animals or indirectly by ingestion of contaminated material. The usual route of infection within 
cattle herds is by inhalation of infected aerosol, which are expelled from the lungs by coughing. 
Humans can become infected by ingesting raw milk from infected cows, or through contact with 
infected tissues at abattoirs or butchers. 
16	Deduce the 
challenges in 
developing new 
antibiotics today.
	
◆Zoonosis (plural, 
zoonoses): infectious 
disease that can transfer 
from other species to 
humans.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
538
In Europe, badgers are affected by bTB and can be infected 
by the same strains found in local cattle. The incidence of 
bTB in cattle has increased, and the epidemic has spread 
geographically since the 1980s. bTB can spread from badgers 
to cattle, and from cattle to badgers, although nearly ten 
times as much infection is from badgers to cattle than the 
converse. There is even more transmission of infection within 
each species.
M. tuberculosis and M. bovis are included in the Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis complex (MTBC), which also includes other species 
and variants. The MTBC species are so closely related that 
they are now considered a single species, M. tuberculosis, 
with variants.
Zoonotic transmission of M. bovis from cattle to humans was 
recognized more than a century ago, but transmission of 
MTBC from humans to cattle is less often recognized. Within 
the last decade, however, there have been many published 
reports from around the world that describe human-to-cattle 
transmission of MTBC.
 
■Rabies
Rabies is a viral disease that affects many carnivorous animals, 
including dogs, cats, foxes, skunks, jackals and wolves, affecting 
both wild and domestic animals. The rabies virus is transmitted 
through direct contact (such as through broken skin or mucous 
membranes in the eyes, nose o r mouth) with saliva or nervous 
system tissue from an infected animal. Humans are usually 
infected with rabies from the bite of a rabid animal.
Rabies causes progressive and fatal inflammation of the brain 
and spinal cord. Once symptoms of the disease appear, rabies 
is fatal. However, the disease is avoidable due to vaccines, 
medicines and other intervention techniques that have 
long been available. Despite these precautions, rabies still 
kills approximately 59 000 humans each year in over 150 
countries, according to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (USA), with 95% of cases occurring in Africa and 
Asia. The WHO states that the bite of an infected dog causes 
approximately 99% of rabies transmission to humans.
 
■Figure C3.2.19 The rabies virus
 
■Figure C3.2.18 a) A chest X-ray showing TB in the lungs 
– the white patches visible in the yellow square contain live 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis where lung structure and function 
are permanently destroyed; b) an electron micrograph of the 
bacterium that causes TB, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (×17 750)
a
b


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
539
 
■Japanese encephalitis
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is an infectious disease of the central nervous system caused by the 
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), a zoonotic virus. JEV is prevalent in much of Asia and the Western 
Pacific. It is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes (Figure C3.2.20), 
particularly Culex tritaeniorhynchus.
‘Encephalitis’ is inflammation of the tissues of the brain caused by an infection. The inflammation 
causes the brain to swell, which can lead to headache, stiff neck, sensitivity to light, mental 
confusion and seizures. 
JEV causes disease in horses, donkeys and pigs. Pigs and 
wading birds are the main carriers of the JEV. Other animals 
can be infected but do not usually show signs of illness, 
including wild mammals, reptiles, amphibians and birds, as 
well as domesticated animals such as cattle, sheep, goats and 
pets (dogs and cats).
There is no cure for the disease. Treatment is focused on 
relieving severe clinical signs and supporting the patient 
to overcome the infection. Safe and effective vaccines 
are available to prevent JE. Despite its name, Japanese 
encephalitis is now relatively rare in Japan as a result of mass 
immunization programmes.
 
■AIDS 
AIDS is also caused by two closely related zoonotic viruses: HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV-1 is the strain 
with more virulence: it is more easily transmitted and is the cause of most HIV infections. Both 
HIVs are the result of cross-species transmission of simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIVs) naturally 
infecting African primates. 
AIDS caused by HIV went unidentified (until 1983) and virtually unnoticed for decades before it 
began to spread around the world in the 1980s. This was due to technological and social factors, 
such as affordable international air travel, blood transfusions (with no screening for HIV), sexual 
promiscuity, and the abuse of intravenous drugs.
 
■COVID-19
COVID-19 is a disease that recently transferred from another species, with profound consequences for 
humans. It is one of three novel and infectious respiratory coronaviruses that have emerged: SARS 
(severe acute respiratory syndrome), MERS (Middle East respiratory syndrome) and COVID-19. 
SARS-CoV-2 is the coronavirus responsible for COVID-19, named because it is a COrona VIrus 
Disease, and was first reported in Wuhan, China, in 2019. It is related to the SARS virus and 
research suggests it came from a bat coronavirus, although the origin that caused the pandemic has 
not been identified. 
 ATL C3.2E 
How does COVID-19 affect the nervous system? Revise what you know about the brain and 
nervous system (Chapters C2.2 and C3.1). Now watch this presentation:  
https://neuroscientificallychallenged.com/posts/2-minute-neuroscience-covid-19-brain
How has your understanding of neural signalling and coordination in the body helped you to 
understand the complex biological concepts presented here?
 
■Figure C3.2.20 Japanese encephalitis is carried by mosquitoes
	
◆Virulent: the ability 
of a virus (or bacterium) 
to cause rapid and severe 
disease.
	
◆Novel virus: a virus 
that has not previously 
been recorded.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
540
The COVID-19 global pandemic changed most people’s way of life, resulting in many countries 
closing their borders, restrictions on international travel, lockdowns in many countries, and schools 
closing. COVID-19 has had a massive impact on life and continues to have effects around the globe.
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour
Scientific collaboration in vaccine creation
Vaccines traditionally take many years to develop and bring into general use, typically 10–15 years. 
This is because of the complexity of vaccine development. Following development of a vaccine, 
which itself takes time and financial support, clinical testing must take place to see whether there 
are any serious side-effects or complications that may arise from receiving the vaccine. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, many scientists came together from around the world to create 
COVID-19 vaccines in a very short space of time. The first COVID-19 vaccine was given in the UK 
on 8 December 2020 – within the same year that the pandemic was declared. This was achieved 
through international collaboration: information about the disease was shared with different 
groups working on specific types of vaccine, governments provided extensive financial support and 
several different stages of clinical trials were carried out simultaneously rather than consecutively. 
The combination of the global collaboration of scientists and the development of mRNA vaccines 
has been compared to the breakthrough that happened when humans first landed on the Moon. 
The techniques and collaborations developed during the pandemic have shown that, when a 
global medical crisis emerges, science has the capability to adapt and come up with solutions 
that are successful and can be implemented quickly. The pandemic created a blueprint for future 
vaccine development.
 ATL C3.2F 
How is knowledge of biological macromolecules driving research and discovery related to SARS-
CoV-2? Use this site to find out more:  
https://pdb101.rcsb.org/learn/resources-to-fight-the-covid-19-pandemic
Write an article about how knowledge of the atomic structures of viral proteins and nucleic acids 
can lead to the discovery of new therapies and the development of vaccines for SARS-CoV-2.
Vaccines and immunization
Vaccines contain antigens, or nucleic acids (DNA or messenger RNA) with sequences that code for 
antigens. These antigens trigger the development of immunity to a specific pathogen without causing 
the disease. Vaccination is the deliberate administration of antigens that have been made harmless 
(after they are obtained from disease-causing organisms) or nucleic acids, in order to give future 
immunity. The practice of vaccination has made important contributions to public health, for 
example, in the case of measles (page 543), smallpox (page 543) and many other diseases. 
Vaccines are administered either by injection, nasal spray or by mouth. Briefly and without causing 
infection, they cause the body’s immune system to make antibodies against the disease, and then 
retain the appropriate memory cells. Active artificial immunity (see page 529) is established in 
this way. The profile of the body’s response in terms of antibody production, if it is re-exposed 
to the antigen, is normally exactly the same as if the immunity was acquired by overcoming an 
earlier infection. 
	
◆Vaccination: 
conferring immunity 
from a disease by 
injecting an antigen of 
attenuated (weakened) 
micro‑organisms, an 
inactivated component 
or a nucleic acid (mRNA), 
so that the body acquires 
antibodies prior to 
potential infection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
541
Vaccines are made from:
l	 dead or attenuated (weakened) bacteria
l	 purified polysaccharides from bacterial walls
l	 inactivated viruses
l	 toxoids (inactivated toxins)
l	 recombinant DNA produced by genetic engineering
l	 messenger RNA (mRNA).
Vaccines are often produced using the immune system responses of other animals, too. 
In communities and countries where vaccines are widely available and have been taken up by 85–
90% of the relevant population, vaccination has reduced some previously common and dangerous 
diseases to rare occurrences. As a result, in these places, the public sometimes becomes casual in its 
regard for the threat such diseases still represent. 
Common mistake
It is incorrect to say that all vaccines are given by injection. Some vaccines can be given orally (such 
as the polio vaccine, which is easier to administer in this way and more economical) or by nasal 
spray, such as nasal spray flu vaccines which are given to children.
 
■Types of immunity
The immune system provides protection to the body from the worst effects of many of the pathogens 
that may invade. Immunity may be acquired actively or passively, naturally or artificially:
l	 actively – naturally, as when our body responds to invasion by a pathogen, or artificially, after 
injection of killed or weakened antigens in a vaccine or nucleic acids that code for antigens, which 
stimulate the development of immunity to a specific pathogen – causing memory cells to be made.
l	 passively – naturally, as when maternal antibodies enter the foetus through the placenta, or 
artificially, such as when ready-made antibodies are injected into the body.
 
■Viral vaccines
Viral vaccines were traditionally whole-virus vaccines that were of two types. Live attenuated 
vaccines use a weakened form of the virus, which can still replicate, but does not cause illness. 
Inactivated vaccines contain viruses whose genome has been destroyed so they cannot infect cells 
and replicate, but can still generate an immune response.
Vaccines cause the body’s immune system to briefly make antibodies against the virus and memory 
cells. Active artificial immunity is established in this way. New vaccines may have to be developed if 
the virus is not stable and undergoes rapid genetic change.
Some vaccines used against COVID-19 are mRNA based and injected into the bloodstream. 
The mRNA is carried by lipid micro-vesicles (liposomes). The target antigen coded by the mRNA 
is either intact spike proteins, or fragments of spike protein. A spike protein is a glycoprotein that 
sticks out from the envelope of some viruses (such as a coronavirus) and facilitates entry of the virion 
into the host cell. These proteins can be identified as foreign by the immune system.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
542
Once mRNA is inside the cell, it starts producing spike protein antigens that are then displayed on 
its surface. The antigens can be detected by the immune system, triggering a response involving 
killer T-cells, which destroy infected cells, as well as antibody-producing B-cells and helper T-cells 
that support antibody production. Memory cells are made, which retain the ability to produce the 
specific antibodies to respond quickly to an infection by the pathogen.
 
■Antivirals 
Most antiviral drugs resemble nucleosides and interfere with viral nucleic acid synthesis. 
Some antivirals have been developed against SARS-CoV-2 to target the viral replication process, 
which is less tolerant to mutations than the spike protein.
Azidothymidine (AZT) inhibits HIV reproduction by interfering with the synthesis of DNA by 
reverse transcriptase. Currently, multi-drug treatments, known as ‘drug cocktails’, have been found 
to be most effective against HIV. Such an approach commonly includes a combination of two 
nucleoside mimics and a protease inhibitor, which interferes with an enzyme required for assembly 
of virus particles. It is also less likely that any new mutant HIV strain will overcome all of the 
inhibitory effects. 
 
■The effectiveness of vaccination programmes – 
epidemiological data
Epidemiology is the study of the occurrence, distribution and control of diseases. A study of 
community disease patterns of this sort may be a reliable source of evidence. However, when the 
community-wide administration of a vaccine is closely followed by a decrease in the targeted disease, 
a causal relationship has not been proven. We cannot be certain it was the vaccine that prevented the 
infections because there are so many uncontrolled variables affecting a community and its health. 
TB is a major worldwide public health problem of long standing. There is evidence that TB was 
present in some of the earliest human communities and it has persisted as a major threat to health 
where people live in crowded conditions. This disease is relatively rare in most economically 
developed countries, but globally almost 14 million people have active TB. In economically 
developing countries with a high incidence of this disease, it primarily affects young adults. 
In economically developed countries where TB, until very recently, ceased to be a major health 
threat, the rising incidence is largely among people with HIV/AIDS who are immunocompromised 
(page 529), and also among people arriving from other countries. 
A vaccine against tuberculosis, the Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, is prepared from a strain 
of attenuated (weakened) live bovine tuberculosis bacillus. It is most often used to prevent the spread 
of TB among children.
17	Distinguish 
between antibiotics 
and antivirals. 
Suggest a disease 
for which each 
could be used.
	
◆Epidemiology: the 
study of the occurrence, 
distribution and control of 
infectious diseases.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
543
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Look at the pattern of deaths from 
TB in a developed country, 1900–
2000, shown in Figure C3.2.21a. 
Examine the graph carefully and 
then answer question 1.
In the prevention and control of 
measles, the first measles vaccines 
became available in 1963. It was 
then replaced by a superior version 
in 1968. Epidemiological evidence 
of the effect of the widespread 
use of these vaccines in one 
developed country is shown in 
Figure C3.2.21b. Examine these 
data carefully and then answer 
question 2.
1	 Using the epidemiological 
evidence in Figure C3.2.21a, 
suggest the actions needed to 
combat the spread of TB in a 
community in order of priority, 
paying particular attention to the 
importance to be placed on a 
vaccination programme.
2	 Analyse the extent to which 
the epidemiological data in 
Figure C3.2.21b support the idea 
of vaccination against measles 
as an effective procedure for 
maintaining community health.
annual death rate (thousands)
year
decline attributable to 
improvements in 
housing provision 
and diet for the poorest 
people in 
society
first anti-TB drug 
treatments discovered
BCG immunization 
programmes widely 
adopted
upturn possibly attributable 
to globalization of
population movements,
and appearance of
bacilli resistant to available 
drugs 
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
a  Deaths from TB in England & Wales, 1900–2000
1944
1954
1964
1974
year
1984
1994
2004
0
100
200
300
400
500 
600
700
800
number of cases (thousands)
vaccine licensed
b  Measles cases in the USA, 1944–2007
 
■Figure C3.2.21 The effectiveness of vaccination programmes – epidemiological data
 
■Smallpox – an infectious disease eradicated by vaccination 
Smallpox, a highly contagious disease, was once regularly found throughout the world. It killed or 
disfigured all those who contracted it. Smallpox is caused by a DNA variola virus. 
Eventually, a suitable vaccine was identified by Edward Jenner (1749–1823), made from a harmless 
but related virus, vaccinia. This was used in a ‘live’ state and could be freeze-dried for transport 
and storage. Consequently, the vaccine was relatively easy to handle and stable for long periods in 
tropical climates.
Link
Smallpox and the 
development of 
the first vaccines is 
discussed in Chapter 
A2.3, page 89.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
544
How eradication came about
Smallpox has been eradicated (the last case occurred in Somalia in 1977). The development of a 
vaccine played an important part in this achievement, which was the outcome of a determined WHO 
programme that began in 1956. This involved careful surveillance of cases in isolated communities 
and within countries sometimes scarred by wars – altogether a remarkable achievement. The reasons 
why smallpox was eradicated when so many other diseases continue are listed in Table C3.2.4.
 
■Table C3.2.4 Why smallpox was eradicated
Patients with the disease were easily identified; they had obvious clinical features.
Transmission was by direct contact only.
On diagnosis, patients were isolated and all their contacts traced. All were vaccinated.
It had a short period of infectivity of about 3–4 weeks.
Patients who recovered did not retain any virus in the body, so ‘carriers’ did not exist.
There were no animals that acted as a vectors or ‘reservoirs’ of the infection (which, otherwise, would have 
been able to pass on the virus to other humans).
The virus had slow mutation rate. Minor changes in antigens (antigenic shift) may cause memory cells to fail 
to recognize a pathogen.
Last, but not least – the issue was tackled through international cooperation by the WHO.
TOK
What is the role of inductive and deductive 
reasoning in scientific inquiry, prediction 
and explanation? 
Medical science often uses deductive reasoning, which starts 
with general principles and uses them to predict specific future 
results. Deductive tests are often formulated as, ‘if then’ 
statements: if the hypothesis is true, then a specific prediction 
should be observed.
A good example of the deductive method in medicine is the 
use of double-blind, randomized, controlled trials that scientists 
use to test new drugs, e.g., remdesivir, a drug approved in 
the US for emergency use in severely ill, hospitalized COVID-
19 patients. Randomized clinical trials are implied when 
companies assert that a drug has been ‘scientifically tested’, 
and such trials remain the scientific ‘gold standard’.
Medical science also uses inductive reasoning, which starts 
with specific observations that lead to a hypothesis that 
is then generalized. The discovery of the smallpox vaccine 
is a good example of a medical discovery made through 
inductive reasoning. 
Smallpox was caused by one of two virus variants, Variola major 
and Variola minor. The risk of death was 30%, with higher rates 
among babies; those who survived had extensive skin scarring 
and some were left blind. It was eradicated by 1980 with a 
global vaccination programme. The inventor of the smallpox 
vaccine, British medical doctor Edward Jenner, observed at the 
end of the eighteenth century that individuals who milked cows 
and were exposed to cowpox were immune to human smallpox 
infection. He correctly reasoned from this observation that a 
vaccine (from the Latin vacca, for ‘cow’) made from cowpox 
lesions could be protective.
Herd immunity and the prevention of epidemics
To control a contagious disease, it is not essential for the whole population to be immunized against 
it. The herd immunity theory proposes that the more people in a population who are immune to a 
disease, the lower the risk of someone who is susceptible becoming infected, as the transmission of 
the disease is greatly impeded. For herd immunity to succeed, members of a population are 
dependent on each other. To take an extreme example, if all but one person in a country is immune 
to a contagious disease, the chance of the one susceptible person being exposed to the pathogen 
within that country is almost zero. Some people cannot have vaccines so, with the majority of the 
population vaccinated, those who cannot have vaccines are still protected.
	
◆Herd immunity: 
indirect protection from 
an infectious disease 
that happens when the 
majority of a population 
is immune either through 
vaccination or immunity 
developed through 
previous infection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
545
No herd immunity
susceptible
infected
immune
disease transmission
Herd immunity achieved
 
■Figure C3.2.22 Herd immunity
What proportion of a population could be not vaccinated but still be protected by the majority who 
have been vaccinated? This depends on the nature of the disease-causing organism and its method of 
transmission. Table C3.2.5 provides information about some contagious diseases.
 
■Table C3.2.5 The threshold percentage of the population needed to achieve herd immunity
Disease 
Transmission route
Percentage threshold to achieve herd immunity
diphtheria 
via saliva 
85%
measles 
airborne 
83–95%
mumps 
droplet 
75–86%
rubella 
droplet 
83–85%
Based on the data in Table C3.2.5, some might think it is safe to avoid immunization. However, this 
is a mathematical model concerned with reducing the likelihood of infection. It is best to restrict 
failure to immunize or vaccinate to those who might be harmed by it, such as people with weakened 
or compromised immune systems. 
Given the success of vaccination programmes in eradicating contagious diseases, the public has 
sometimes become casual about the threat that such diseases still pose. During your middle school 
science courses, you may have studied the effects of a newspaper article from 1998 that suggested a 
link between a vaccine to protect against measles, mumps and rubella (the combined MMR vaccine) 
and autism. Based on this article, so many parents declined the invitation to have their children 
vaccinated that the proportion of vaccinated children fell below the herd immunity threshold in 
some communities. The doctor who proposed this link to autism was subsequently discredited.
In 2016, the WHO declared the UK free of measles, but the UK lost this status three years later. 
There were 991 confirmed cases in England and Wales in 2018. The majority of these cases were 
among older teenagers and people in their early 20s who did not receive the MMR vaccination when 
they were younger.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Organisms
546
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour
Scientists publish their research so that other scientists can evaluate it. This ‘peer review’ of scientists 
reviewing and commenting on the work of others ensures that research published in journals is 
accurate and valid. The media often report on the research while evaluation is still happening, and 
the public need to be aware of this. Vaccines are tested rigorously and the risks of side effects are 
minimal, but not nil. The distinction between pragmatic truths and certainty is poorly understood. 
In science, if something has utility then it is useful. The term ‘pragmatism’ refers to a way of dealing 
with problems or situations that focuses on practical approaches and solutions. Pragmatism can be 
seen as truth established through a majority consensus within a scientific community. The COVID-
19 vaccine had been fully tested and, although side effects were known about, it was a pragmatic 
solution to the pandemic. Vaccine hesitancy was, in part, the result of some members of the public 
not appreciating the difference between pragmatism and certainty. 
Science is not about absolute certainty. It aims to generate a theory that matches observations 
and to produce repeatable experiments, and is therefore pragmatic. However, theories can be 
overturned by data and replaced with new theories.
TOK
How might the context in which knowledge is presented influence 
whether it is accepted or rejected?
The COVID-19 pandemic and public attitudes towards vaccination programmes highlight interesting 
TOK dynamics between the scientific community and non-scientists. Many cases of vaccination 
reluctance depended on a poor understanding either of how vaccinations work or the statistical 
data showing how effective vaccinations actually are. Some people held political, social, cultural 
or religious beliefs about the role of government in encouraging vaccinations. An interesting TOK 
analysis might also explore the role that social media plays in the dissemination of flawed information 
about vaccinations.
Evaluation of data related to the  
COVID-19 pandemic
Tool 3: Mathematics
Calculating and interpreting percentage 
change and percentage difference
Percentage change measures the change in a variable 
over time, whereas percentage difference calculates the 
difference between two averages. To calculate the 
percentage change:
1	 Calculate the difference (increase or decrease) 
between the two numbers you are comparing.
increase = new number − original number
2	 Divide the increase by the original number and 
multiply the answer by 100.
% change = 
change
original number × 100
If your answer is a negative number, then this is a 
percentage decrease.
To calculate percentage difference:
1	 Calculate the difference between the two values by 
subtracting one value from another.
2	 The average is the value halfway between the 
two numbers:
average = first value + second value
2
 
3	 Express the difference as a percentage of the average:
(
difference
average ) × 100
	
◆Percentage 
difference: the 
difference between 
two values divided by 
the average of the two 
values, shown as a 
percentage.
	
◆Percentage change: 
the change in a variable 
over time; i.e. the 
percent change in a 
value compared to its 
initial value.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C3.2   Defence against disease
547
 
■Vaccine efficacy
Vaccine efficacy refers to the effectiveness of a vaccine in reducing the incidence of a disease. It is a 
measure of the percentage change in numbers of people with the disease following vaccination.
A study was carried out to investigate the efficacy of an mRNA vaccine, mRNA-1273, on the 
incidence of COVID-19 disease. The trial enrolled 30 420 volunteers who were randomly assigned 
to receive either the vaccine or a placebo (an injection that did not contain the vaccine). There were 
15 210 participants in each group. Symptomatic COVID-19 illness was later confirmed in 
185 participants in the placebo group and in 11 participants in the mRNA-1273 group.
The percentage change in the incidence of COVID-19 was:
(change ÷ original number) × 100 = (185 – 11)
185
 × 100
Vaccine efficacy was therefore 94.1%
 
■Comparing the incidence of COVID-19 in different countries
The daily incidence of COVID-19 in one country was 40 and in another country it was 20. 
The percentage difference between the two countries is:
difference between the two values = 40 – 20 = 20
	
average value = (40 + 20)
2
 = 30
	
percentage difference = (
difference
average ) × 100 = (
20
30) × 100 = 66.7%
 ATL C3.2G 
Full data for the COVID-19 pandemic for every country can be found on the WHO website: 
https://covid19.who.int
Locate your own country on this website. 
1	 Select ‘Table view’.
2	 Click on your country: graphs showing changes in the incidence of cases will be shown.
3	 Move the cursor over the graph: figures for the number of cases for a specific day will be shown. 
Slide from left to right to show changes in incidence.
4	 Select a one-month period and take values for the number of cases at the start and end of 
this period.
5	 Calculate the percentage change in coronavirus infections over this period. 
Now select a second country. Find the value for coronavirus infections at the end of the same 
period you used in the first exercise. Calculate the percentage difference between the two values. 
How much higher or lower were infections in the second country? Why do you think this was?
Further data about the pandemic can be found on this site:
https://worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/covid
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How do animals protect themselves from threats?
2	 How can false-positive and false-negative results be avoided in diagnostic tests?
Top tip!
Make sure you 
can calculate both 
percentage difference 
and percentage 
change. Here we will 
practise using data 
relating to the COVID-
19 pandemic.
