Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
548
C4.1
Populations and communities
•	 How do interactions between organisms regulate sizes of component populations in 
a community?
•	 What interactions within a community make its populations interdependent?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C4.1.1 	 Populations as interacting groups of organisms of the same species living in 
an area
	 C4.1.2 	 Estimation of population size by random sampling
	 C4.1.3 	 Random quadrat sampling to estimate population size for sessile organisms
	 C4.1.4 	 Capture–mark–release–recapture and the Lincoln index to estimate population 
size for motile organisms
	 C4.1.5 	 Carrying capacity and competition for limited resources
	 C4.1.6 	 Negative feedback control of population size by density-dependent factors
	 C4.1.7 	 Population growth curves
	 C4.1.8 	 Modelling of the sigmoid population growth curve
	 C4.1.9 	 A community as all of the interacting organisms in an ecosystem
	 C4.1.10 	Competition versus cooperation in intraspecific relationships
	 C4.1.11 	Herbivory, predation, interspecific competition, mutualism, parasitism and 
pathogenicity as categories of interspecific relationship within communities
	 C4.1.12 	Mutualism as an interspecific relationship that benefits both species
	 C4.1.13 	Resource competition between endemic and invasive species
	 C4.1.14 	Tests for interspecific competition
	 C4.1.15 	Use of the chi-squared test for association between two species
	 C4.1.16 	Predator–prey relationships as an example of density-dependent control of 
animal populations
	 C4.1.17 	Top-down and bottom-up control of populations in communities
	 C4.1.18 	Allelopathy and secretion of antibiotics 
Note: There is no higher-level only content in C4.1.
Populations 
Members of a species may be reproductively isolated in separate 
populations. A population consists of all the individuals of the 
same species in a habitat at any one time. The members of a 
population have the chance to interbreed, assuming the species 
concerned reproduces sexually. Reproductive isolation is used 
to distinguish one population of a species from another.
	
◆Population: interacting groups of organisms of the same 
species living in an area.
 
■Figure C4.1.1 A population of zebra
Link
Reproductive isolation 
is covered in Chapter 
A4.1, page 149.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
549
Estimation of population size 
by random sampling
To study populations, an ecologist must be able to sample them. Specific methods are used to 
estimate population size in non-mobile species, for example plants and sessile animals such as 
barnacles (see page 327), and mobile animal species in the wild. Population growth is affected by 
abiotic and biotic factors, and the increase in a population follows a pattern that can be modelled. 
In ecological investigations, the size and complexity of study sites means that not every organism can 
be examined, nor every part of the site looked at. Samples are taken that form a representation of 
the full site. Populations are estimated by taking samples from the study site. Randomness is needed 
when sampling to avoid bias (see below). Random sampling is needed to avoid areas being selected 
that do not reflect the whole study site – there would be a temptation, for example, to choose areas 
that have a high biodiversity but which are not necessarily representative of the whole area.
The distribution of two or more species in a habitat may be entirely random. Alternatively, factors 
such as specific abiotic conditions may bring about close association of some species – plant A may 
tend to grow close to plant B. For example, soils rich in calcium ions typically support distinctively 
different populations from those found on dry acidic soils. If we want to discover whether there is a 
particular association between two species in a habitat, we need reliable data on their distribution; 
such data are obtained by random sampling. 
Top tip!
Random sampling ensures that every individual in the community has an equal chance of being 
selected, ensuring a representative sample. It is appropriate if the study area is homogeneous (the 
same throughout), but not if sampling along a transect (page 349) where there is an environmental 
gradient and change in species composition.
Nature of science: Measurement
Random sampling, instead of measuring an entire population, inevitably results in sampling errors. 
In this case, the difference between the estimate of population size and the true size of the whole 
population is the sampling error. If the sample does not adequately represent the entire population, 
any analysis of the sample might not apply to the entire population. 
Random errors in measurement, due to unknown or unpredictable differences, lead to imprecision 
and uncertainty, whereas systematic errors lead to inaccuracy. Repeating and then averaging 
measurements can reduce random error. Systematic errors result from faults or flaws in the 
investigation design or procedure that shift all measurements in a systematic way so that, in the 
course of repeated samples, the measurement value is constantly displaced in the same way. 
Systematic errors can be reduced or eliminated with careful experimental design and techniques. 
Scientists can also share their experimental data and design with other scientists, giving others the 
chance to evaluate the design in a process called peer review, which further guards against 
systematic errors.
Top tip!
Systematic errors 
lead to inaccurate 
measurements of 
the true value. The 
best way to check for 
systematic errors is to 
use different methods 
to perform the same 
measurement. Random 
uncertainty is always 
present and cannot 
be corrected; it is 
connected with the 
precision of repeated 
measurements.
	
◆Sample: a subset of 
a whole population or 
habitat used to estimate 
the values that might 
have been obtained 
if every individual or 
response was measured.
	
◆Random sampling: 
a method of choosing a 
sample from a population 
without any bias.
	
◆Sampling error: 
statistical errors that 
arise when a sample 
does not represent the 
whole population, i.e. it 
is the difference between 
the real values of the 
population and the values 
derived by using samples 
from the population.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
550
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing 
Controlling variables
It is important to record a representative sample from the area being studied when 
sampling populations in the wild. Random sampling is used if the same habitat is 
found throughout the area. Stratified sampling is used in two areas of different 
habitat quality. 
When sampling along an environmental gradient (see Chapter B4.1, page 349), the 
positions of transects are located at random, but sampling along the transect is done 
in a systematic (non-random) way to ensure that the whole gradient is sampled, called 
systematic sampling. To do this, sample points are taken at fixed distances along the 
transect (for example, every 5 m).
1	 Design an experiment to sample a local habitat using the quadrat method. You 
can either select a sessile species to quantify (the organism should be sufficiently 
abundant to measure in repeated samples) or the whole plant community.
Samples must be located at random so that accurate representative data can be 
acquired. A random number generator, found on most modern calculators, helps to 
ensure population sampling is free from bias. Random number generators can also 
be found online (for example www.random.org) and as smartphone apps (sometimes 
advertised as ‘integer generators’). Alternatively, putting numbers from, say, 1 to 100 
into a bag and pulling numbers out one at a time to generate sample locations will do 
the same job!
	
◆Stratified sampling: 
used in areas that 
contain two or more 
different habitat types; 
the technique takes into 
account the proportional 
area of different habitat 
types and samples each 
one accordingly.
	
◆Systematic 
sampling: used where 
the study area includes an 
environmental gradient. A 
transect is used to sample 
systematically along the 
environmental gradient.
Estimating population size 
for sessile organisms
 
■Random quadrat sampling
Quadrats (Figure C4.1.2) are commonly used to study populations 
and communities. They are used for estimating the abundance of 
plants and sessile animals.
A quadrat is a square frame which outlines a known area for 
the purpose of sampling. The choice of size of quadrat varies 
depending on the size of the individuals of the population being 
analysed. For example, a 10 cm2 quadrat is ideal for assessing 
epiphytic Pleurococcus, a single-celled alga commonly found 
growing on damp walls and tree trunks. Alternatively, a 1 m2 
quadrat is far more useful for analysing the size of two herbaceous 
plant populations observed in grassland, or of the earthworms and 
slugs that can be extracted from between the plants or from the 
soil below. Quadrats are placed according to random numbers, 
after the area has been divided into a grid of numbered sampling 
squares (Figure C4.1.3). The presence or absence in each quadrat 
of the species under investigation is then recorded. 
 
■Figure C4.1.2 A quadrat being used to estimate the species 
richness of plants in a water meadow at Slapton Ley, Devon


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
551
1	 Outline how 
quadrats can be 
used to sample 
populations of 
sessile organisms.
3  Within each quadrat, the individual species
    are identified, and then the density,
    frequency, cover or abundance of each
    species is estimated.
2  Coordinates for placing quadrats are
    obtained as sequences of random numbers,
    using computer software, a calculator or 
    published tables.
1  A map of the habitat (e.g. meadowland) is
    marked out with gridlines along two edges
    of the area to be analysed.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y-axis
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
0
100
x-axis
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
0
100
x-axis
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y-axis
4  Density, frequency, cover or abundance
    estimates are then quantified by measuring
    the total area of the habitat (the area
    occupied by the population) in square metres.
    The mean density, frequency, cover or
    abundance can be calculated using the
    equation:
                            mean density (etc.) per quadrat × total area
population size =
                                            area of each quadrat
 
■Figure C4.1.3 Random locating of quadrats


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
552
TOK
It is impossible for a scientist to see every event or every object in the world, yet it is their job to 
identify features and truths of the world that apply to the world as a whole. This raises a challenge 
when it comes to constructing general knowledge – how do we select the observations that we 
can then use to make general claims about the world? Therefore effective sampling is so important; 
the scientist must make choices and decisions regarding the sample to ensure that the knowledge 
gained is accurate when applied to the wider world. 
This element of selection and analysis introduces the possibility of bias, where the scientist, either 
consciously or not, makes decisions that shape the data in ways that may make it less accurate. 
Following the scientific method and thinking carefully about how best to create samples, however, 
can mitigate these concerns. A full TOK analysis of bias in the sciences would both identify the root 
of concern, but also then explore the conventions that the scientific community follows to mitigate 
these factors. An even fuller TOK analysis might evaluate the success of these conventions.
 
■Calculating standard deviation
Variation is a quantitative measure of the distribution (spread or clustering) of the values in a data 
set. Range and standard deviation are two statistics used when summarizing variability within a 
sample, but one is much more reliable than the other. The range is the difference between the largest 
and smallest data values. It is measured in the same units as the data. If there are outliers in the 
sample, the range will suggest a high degree of spread, though most data may be highly clustered. 
For this reason, as a descriptive statistic describing variability, range is an unreliable measure. Since 
it only depends on two of the measurements, range is most useful in representing the dispersion of 
small data sets. 
Standard deviation from the mean measures how spread out data are from the central tendency. It is 
a measure of the variation from the mean of a set of normally distributed values.
l	 A small standard deviation indicates that the data are clustered closely around the mean value.
l	 A large standard deviation indicates a wider spread around the mean.
Once obtained, the value may be applied to the normal distribution curve (Figure C4.1.4). Note that 
68% of the data occurs within one standard deviation of the mean, and more than 95% of the data 
occurs within two standard deviations of the mean. So, a small standard deviation indicates that 
the observations (the values) differ very little from the mean. Standard deviation is also a measure of 
reliability: a small standard deviation indicates reliability. 
Arithmetical mean
1 SD
1 SD
68%
95%
2 SD
2 SD
 
■Figure C4.1.4 The normal distribution and its standard deviation (SD)
	
◆Variation: a 
quantitative measure of 
the distribution (spread or 
clustering) of the values in 
a data set.
	
◆Range: the difference 
between the largest and 
smallest data values.
	
◆Standard deviation 
(SD): the spread of a set 
of normally distributed 
data from the mean 
of the sample; it is a 
measure of the variability 
of a population from a 
sample. A small standard 
deviation indicates that 
the data are more reliable.
	
◆Normal distribution: 
a data-set distribution 
that is symmetrical about 
the mean, forming a bell-
shaped curve.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
553
The standard deviation can be used to help to decide whether the difference between two related 
means is significant or not. If the standard deviations are much larger than the difference between 
the means, this difference in the means is highly unlikely to be significant. On the other hand, 
when the standard deviations are much smaller than the difference between the means, then this 
difference is almost certainly significant.
Top tip!
Standard deviation is a calculation based on the mean value and the variation around it. It is more 
reliable than range. Standard deviation gives a value that represents the average distance of each 
point of data from the mean. You do not need to memorize the formula for standard deviation.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying measures of dispersion: standard deviation
The standard deviation (SD) is calculated in five steps.
1	 First, calculate the mean, xˉ
2	 Calculate the deviation of each value from the mean: x–xˉ
3	 Square each deviation: (x–xˉ )2
4	 Add the squared deviations: ∑(x–xˉ )2
5	 Finally, divide by the number of values (n).
You could use a calculator or practise applying technology to process data by using an 
Excel spreadsheet to calculate the standard deviation (Tool 2: Technology, page 561).
The formula for SD given here is for when the data set represents an entire population. 
This is known as the ‘population standard deviation’. If the SD is calculated from a 
sample, the formula needs to be modified by dividing by n − 1 rather than n. This is 
called the ‘sample standard deviation’. This is because when the sample standard 
deviation is calculated, the true variability in the population tends to be underestimated, 
and so the estimate of the true population standard deviation is biased: to correct this 
bias, the numerator is divided by n – 1. This has been shown to make the sample 
standard deviation an unbiased estimate of the population standard deviation.
Link
Calculating the mean 
(and mode and 
median) is covered 
in Chapter D3.2, 
page 745.
Top tip!
The mean is calculated 
by adding together all 
the values and dividing 
by the total number 
of values. The purpose 
of averaging data 
(provided it follows a 
normal distribution) is 
to reduce the effect of 
random errors.
Common mistake
A common misconception is that standard deviation decreases with increasing sample size. Standard 
deviation can either increase or decrease as sample size increases; it depends on the measurements 
in the sample. If there is a lot of variation in a population, the standard deviation will be large.
Top tip!
When the value of the standard deviation is low, most scores in the sample will be clustered and 
close to the mean. When the value of the standard deviation is high, the sample scores are more 
widely spread from the mean. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
554
2	 An ecologist investigated the reproductive capacity of two species of a common 
grassland flower, Ranunculus acris and Ranunculus repens. Using comparable sized plants 
growing under similar conditions in the same soil, the numbers of fruits formed in 100 
flowers of each species were counted and recorded. The results are given in Table C4.1.1.
 
■Table C4.1.1 Data on fruit production in two species of Ranunculus
Number of fruits
Frequency
R. acris
R. repens
15
0
0
16
0
1
17
0
1
18
1
1
19
2
2
20
1
4
21
4
4
22
8
8
23
7
7
24
9
9
25 
10 
10
26 
16 
16
27
9
9
28
10 
10
29
4
4
30
5
5
31
3
3
32
1
1
33
1
1
34
2
2
35
1
1
36
1
1
37
0
0
38
0
0
39
2
0
a	 Calculate the mean and standard deviation for both species.
b	 Deduce whether there is a difference in fruit production between the two species.
TOK
Mathematics is inherently formal and abstract – its scope is 
related to universal truths unrelated to whatever happens to 
be the case in the observable world. Science, on the other 
hand, aims to develop formal and abstract truths about 
the observable world, but must do so building on certain 
observations. Scientists will translate observations of the 
world into mathematical entities (for example by observing 
species in a sample and translating that into a number). Using 
these quantitative data, scientists can conduct mathematical 
analyses of the types considered here to identify numerical 
trends and further data. These data then are applied back to 
the natural world. A good example of this process is shown 
in Figure C4.1.3 (page 551). In step 3, the observations are 
quantified and, after the mathematical manipulations in step 4, 
the numbers are applied to the actual world in the form of a 
claim about the overall population size of the species.
Try to identify where the choices of the investigating scientist 
have been made and why they made them, and evaluate 
their effectiveness. This overlap of the Areas of Knowledge 
of Natural Sciences and Mathematics helps make the sciences 
even more reliable. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
555
Estimating population size for motile organisms
 
■Capture–mark–release–recapture method
It is not possible to collect every individual of the population. A sample is taken which is 
representative of the population, from which an estimate of population size can be made. To do this, 
animals are captured, marked in some way, released, and then resampled. A calculation is made that 
uses the relationship between two ratios:  the number of marked animals compared to the size of 
the resampled population, and the ratio of sampled population (captured and marked) compared to 
the total population. This is called the ‘capture–mark–release–recapture method’. Marking varies 
according to the type of organism, for example, wing cases of insects can be marked with pen, snails 
with enamel paint, and fur clippings used for mammals. The markings must be difficult to see as 
high visibility increases the predation risk to the organism. The number of individuals of a species 
are recorded at each stage. The steps of the capture–mark–release–recapture technique and how to 
estimate the population size are outlined in Figure C4.1.5.
 
■Calculating the Lincoln index
The Lincoln index is a statistical measure used to estimate the population size for motile organisms. 
You need to be able to use it to estimate population size and understand the assumptions made 
when using this method.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying the Lincoln index
The total population size is estimated using the following equation:
Population size = (M × N)
R
M = number of animals captured (marked and released) 
N = number of animals recaptured 
R = number of marked animals recaptured 
Prior to experimenting on natural populations, the Lincoln index can be learned and 
understood by application to non-living models. This can be done using a paper activity.
Cut out 100 identical small paper squares and place on a tray. Mark a known number, 
e.g. 20. Put the marked squares back in the tray and mix well. (This is the ‘habitat’.) 
Pull out a random number of squares from the container and count the sample size and 
the number in the sample which are marked. Calculate an estimated population using 
the Lincoln index formula. 
Repeat the experiment at least five times to obtain a range of estimates. Calculate a 
mean estimate and the range of the values obtained. 
	ATL C4.1A 
Before reading on, what are the assumptions made when using the Lincoln index? Find out about 
these using this site: www.countrysideinfo.co.uk/lincoln.htm. Make a list of the assumptions and 
comment on how these would affect the way you collect data for the Lincoln index.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
556
A population of woodlice
Random sample captured
Marked
And released
Sample mixed
with population
24 hours later a second
random sample is caught
in the same location
The number of marked
animals is noted and the
formula is used to estimate
the population size
In ‘capture, mark, release,
recapture’ the size of the
animal population is
estimated by the formula:
where
M = number of animals
        captured, marked
        and released
N = number of animals
        recaptured
R = number of marked
       animals recaptured
here: 
M × N
=
Population size
R
1
5 × 8
population size  = 
 = 40
 
■Figure C4.1.5 Estimating animal populations using capture, mark, release and recapture
Inquiry 3: Evaluating and concluding
Evaluating
Evaluate the Lincoln index by discussing the advantages and pitfalls of the method.
Lincoln index assumptions
Assumptions made when using the Lincoln index on wild animal populations are that:
l	 mixing is complete, so that the marked individuals have spread evenly throughout the population 
between capture and recapture
l	 marks are not removed and do not disappear between capture and recapture
l	 marks are not harmful to the animal nor do they increase predation by making marked 
individuals more visible
l	 it is equally easy to catch each individual in the population
l	 there is no immigration or emigration (i.e. it is a closed population rather than one open to other 
areas), or births or deaths in the population between the times of sampling.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
557
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data
Carry out a capture–mark–release–recapture experiment to investigate and estimate 
the population size for a motile organism using the Lincoln index. You will need to:
l	 collect quantitative data (the number of species counted)
l	 identify and record any relevant qualitative observations
l	 identify and address issues that arise during your data collection.
Repeat the investigation after a few weeks. Are your estimates similar? If not, what 
explanations can you think of for any discrepancies?
3	 Discuss the use 
of capture–mark–
release–recapture 
methods to 
estimate the 
population size of 
motile organisms.
Carrying capacity and competition 
for limited resources
In most ecosystems and for many species, abiotic and biotic factors limit the size of the population. 
Exponential growth cannot continue forever. Eventually resources run low, competition occurs and 
other limiting factors take effect. Limiting factors restrict the growth of a population or prevent it 
from increasing further.
Top tip!
Limiting factors in plants include light, nutrients in the soil, water, carbon dioxide and temperature.
Limiting factors in animals include space, food, mates, nesting sites and water.
For example, if rabbits were introduced into a new meadow, after initial exponential growth, the 
vegetation would eventually be used up faster than it could grow, because of the large numbers of 
rabbits. Further increases in population would stop: in this situation the food has become a limiting 
factor in the growth of the rabbit population. Eventually, the rabbits would reach the carrying 
capacity of their environment. This is the maximum number of a species, or the ‘load’, which can be 
sustainably supported by a given environment. 
Negative feedback control of population 
size by density-dependent factors
Negative feedback refers to the return of a system to its original starting state. In terms of a 
population, this represents the return of a population to its carrying capacity. The interaction 
between predators and their prey is an example of negative feedback (Figure C4.1.6).
Negative feedback control of populations is determined by density-dependent factors. Density-
dependent factors are limiting factors that are related to population density.  
They are biotic factors (e.g. competition for resources) that limit population growth:
l	 internal density-dependent factors: might include fertility or size of breeding territory
l	 external density-dependent factors: might include the increased risk of predation and the 
transfer of pathogens or pests in dense populations. 
Link
Limiting factors are 
covered in Chapter 
B4.1, page 344.
	
◆Carrying capacity: 
the maximum number of 
individuals of a species 
that can be supported by 
a given environment.
	
◆Negative feedback: 
feedback that tends to 
counteract any deviation 
from equilibrium and 
promotes stability.
	
◆Density-dependent: 
factors that lower 
the birth rate or raise 
the death rate as a 
population grows.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
558
Increase in
snowshoe hare
population
Lynx population
decreases as
less food
Increased lynx
population
as more food
Snowshoe hare
population
decreases as more
predation
 
■Figure C4.1.6 An example of negative feedback: 
the predator–prey relationship between snowshoe 
hare and lynx in the boreal forests of North America
4	 Define the term carrying capacity.
Concept: Interaction
Density-dependent factors interact with organisms to cause population numbers to 
fluctuate, ultimately pushing populations back to carrying capacity.
Population growth curves
 
■Exponential growth
Imagine a situation in which a small number of rabbits are allowed to enter a meadow from which 
other rabbits have been excluded. The rabbits initially get used to the new territory and establish 
burrows. There are few reproducing individuals, so initially population growth is small. Once 
established, the rabbits benefit from unrestricted access to rich food supplies and an absence of 
limiting factors – they begin to reproduce. Once numbers start to build up, there is a rapid increase 
in the population. Such rapid increase is called exponential growth. 
Exponential growth is an increasing or accelerating rate of growth. The exponential growth pattern 
occurs in an ideal and unlimited environment.
Exponential growth occurs when:
l	 limiting factors are not restricting the growth of the population
l	 there are plentiful resources, such as light, space, food, and a lack of competition with other 
species
l	 there are favourable abiotic components, such as temperature and rainfall, and a lack of predators 
or disease.
Growth is initially slow but becomes increasingly rapid and does not slow down as the 
population increases (see Figure C4.1.7).
population size
time
 
■Figure C4.1.7 An 
exponential growth curve
Density-independent factors will affect the populations of all species 
in the same ecosystem, regardless of population size (for example, 
weather, climate and natural disasters), whereas density-dependent 
factors will have varying effects on the populations of different species. 
Because density-independent factors are not reliant on the numbers of 
individuals in a population they do not affect carrying capacity, whereas 
density-dependent factors, that do limit population size, define the 
upper limit to population growth (the carrying capacity). The number 
of individuals in a population may fluctuate due to density-independent 
factors, but density-dependent factors tend to push the population back 
towards the carrying capacity. 
Link
The density-
dependent 
relationship between 
the snowshoe hare 
and lynx in Figure 
C4.1.6 is an example of 
population control by 
negative feedback.
5	 List factors 
that are:
a	 affected by 
population 
density 
b	 unrelated to 
population 
density.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
559
 
■Sigmoid growth curve
The carrying capacity (see above) represents the population size at which environmental resistance 
limits further population growth. Exponential growth eventually succumbs to environmental 
resistance, which can cause a decrease in natality, an increase in mortality, or both. When a graph 
of population growth for such species is plotted against time, an S-shaped population curve is 
produced. This is also known as a sigmoid growth curve. An S-shaped population curve shows an 
initial rapid growth (exponential growth) and then slows down as the carrying capacity is reached.
Figure C4.1.8 shows an S-population curve. The curve shows the establishment of a population 
following introduction into a new environment. There are three stages.
1	 Exponential growth stage, where limiting factors are not restricting the growth of a population. 
With low or reduced limiting factors, the population expands exponentially into the habitat. 
Both the number of individuals and the rate of growth increases rapidly.
2	 Transition phase, where the increase in number begins to slow, as does the rate of growth. The 
slowdown occurs because limiting factors begin to affect the population and restrict its growth. 
In a larger population there will be increased competition between the individuals of that 
population for the same limiting factors, such as resources. An increase in predators, attracted 
by the large population, and an increase in the rate of disease and mortality due to increased 
numbers of individuals living in a small area, also cause a slowdown in growth. 
3	 Plateau phase, where limiting factors restrict the population to its carrying capacity (see above). 
Changes in limiting factors, predation, disease and abiotic factors cause populations to fluctuate 
(increase and decrease) around the carrying capacity (K).
Sigmoid growth starts with the exponential growth phase, where the population is not controlled 
by limiting factors. Population growth slows as a population reaches the carrying capacity of 
the environment.
time
population size
competition for limiting
factors increases
low or reduced limiting factors
exponential growth
 
■Figure C4.1.9 Changing conditions along 
an S-shaped population growth curve
carrying capacity (K )
population size
1
2
3
time
 
■Figure C4.1.8 An S-shaped or sigmoid growth curve
The phases of the S-shaped curve can be summarized as equations using natality (N), 
immigration (I), emigration (E) and mortality (M), where: 
l	 natality – the rate at which individuals are born (the birth rate)
l	 mortality – the rate at which individuals die (the death rate)
l	 immigration – movement of new individuals into a population from outside a given area
l	 emigration – the departure of individuals from a population in a given area.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
560
 
■Table C4.1.2 The phases shown in the sigmoid curve can be explained by relative rates of natality, mortality, immigration  
and emigration
Phase
Equation
Relative effects
What is happening?
exponential
I + N > E + M
initially, natality exceeds mortality; as population 
rapidly increases, mortality rates begin to increase
no limiting factors; abundant resources; low 
competition; high reproduction
transition
I + N > E + M
natality rate approaches mortality rate
resources are more scarce; competition increases
plateau
I + N = E + M
fluctuation around a set point; where the curve slopes 
downwards, M > N, where it slopes upwards, N > M
population stabilizes around the carrying capacity
2000
number of generations
population size
1500
K
1000
500
0
0
5
10
15
exponential growth curve
sigmoid growth curve
stabilized by
available resources
both exponential
at first
competition for
limited resources
growth without limitation
    
 
■Sigmoid population growth – case study
A study carried out on Lady Musgrave Island, off the east coast of Australia, investigated the growth 
of corals following disturbance from tropical cyclones. The location of the island, and the data 
recorded, are shown in Figure C4.1.11.
24°S
152.3°E
152.4°E
152.5°E
23.9°S
23.8°S
Lady Musgrave
Island
hard coral cover (%)
latitude
time (days)
longitude
a
b
0
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
20
40
60
80
2000
km
0
10
km
0
N
 
■Figure C4.1.11 Field data showing the percentage area covered by hard corals as a 
function of time after external disturbance on Lady Musgrave Island
 
■Figure C4.1.10 
Comparing exponential 
and sigmoid 
growth curves


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
561
The data show a typical sigmoid growth response after some disturbance (e.g. a tropical cyclone): 
exponential growth for low coral cover is followed by a gradual reduction in net growth rate as the 
coral cover approaches its carrying capacity.
Tool 2: Technology
Using spreadsheets to manipulate data
A sigmoid function is a mathematical function that has an 
S-shaped curve when plotted. The logistic sigmoid function, 
which is the most common example of a sigmoid function, is 
calculated as:
F(x) = 
1
(1 + e–x)
To calculate the value of a sigmoid function for a given x 
value in Excel, use the following formula: =1/(1+EXP(-A1))
Logarithmic graphs
Sometimes during a biology investigation, the data collected are not easy to plot on a graph because 
of the very wide range of values measured. An example arises when measuring the population 
growth rate of yeast using a counting chamber known as a haemocytometer. Rather than plotting the 
averaged raw data, it is preferable to calculate the base ten logarithm of the measurements. 
Some measurements, such as pH and absorbances, have no units. The pH scale, for example, is 
logarithmic. A logarithmic scale compresses the range of values and gives more space to smaller values 
while compressing the space available for the larger values. Each cycle on the scale increases by a power 
of 10: for example, in the first cycle values would be 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., whereas in the second cycle they 
would be 10, 20, 30, 40 and so on, and in the third cycle 100, 200, 300, 400 and so on.  
Tool 3: Mathematics
Constructing and interpreting 
logarithmic graphs 
You need to be able to test the growth 
of a population against the model of 
exponential growth using a graph with a 
logarithmic scale for size of population on 
the vertical y-axis and a non-logarithmic 
scale for time on the horizontal x-axis.
A logarithmic scale can be calculated 
using a calculator or Excel: the formula is 
‘=LOG10(cell reference)’. The logarithm of 
the number only increases relatively slowly 
and a straight line plot is generated. 
Alternatively, log-linear graph paper 
(Figure C4.1.12) can be used.
0.1
0.5
1.0
5.0
10.0
50.0
100.0
y-axis, log scale
0
5
10
15
x-axis, linear scale
 
■Figure C4.1.12 A logarithmic scale on the 
y-axis with three cycles: 0.1 to 1.0, 1.0 to 10.0 
and 10.0 to 100.0. The x-axis has a linear scale. 
Numbers can be plotted directly on to graph 
paper without calculating their log10 values
Top tip!
Quantities that 
represent ratios of 
two values, such as 
absorbance, do not 
have units. Both pH 
and absorbance are 
unit-less since they are 
a logarithmic function, 
and logarithms are 
always pure numbers 
that have no units.
Nature of science: Models
The population growth curve represents an idealized 
graphical model. It is unlikely that the population 
growth of an actual population will show such 
smooth, idealized curves. There will be fluctuations 
due to density-independent and density-dependent 
factors. Models are often simplifications of complex 
systems, and indicate overall patterns rather than 
the specific detail of individual examples. Models 
allow predictions of patterns that should occur given 
certain parameters. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
562
Modelling of the sigmoid 
population growth curve
You need to be able to collect data regarding population growth. Yeast and 
duckweed are recommended, but there are other organisms that could be 
used that reproduce under experimental conditions.
 
■Modelling the growth curve using duckweed
Pond surfaces are often covered by free-floating aquatic plants. One such 
group is the duckweeds, in the genus Lemna. They are known as duckweed 
because they provide a staple diet for ducks and other aquatic birds. These 
rapidly growing plants are used as a model system for studies in population 
ecology. This simple organism follows the classic growth curve and can, 
therefore, be used effectively to model the changes in population size.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data
An experiment on population growth in Lemna can be carried 
out in the lab:
1	 A small number (e.g. 15) of duckweed thalli is put in a cup or 
beaker containing pond water (200–300 cm3).
2	 Replicates (at least five) of the experiment are set up.
3	 The number of thalli is counted twice a week, for at least 
six weeks.
4	 The mean number of thalli is calculated and plotted against time. 
5	 The graph should show the S-shaped/sigmoid population 
growth curve. Carrying capacity is reached when there is 
no room for further thalli, and competition for space limits 
further growth. 
The effect of different environmental conditions on growth rate 
can be studied, such as salinity, pH, concentration of nitrates 
and phosphate level. Of course, one environmental condition 
should be changed at a time.
Communities in ecosystems
A community consists of all the living things in an ecosystem – the total 
of all the populations of all species. So, for example, the community of 
a well-stocked pond would include the populations of rooted, floating 
and submerged plants, the populations of bottom-living animals, the 
populations of fish and invertebrates of the open water, and the populations 
of surface-living organisms – a very large number of organisms in total. 
The savannah grasslands and lakeland ecosystems of Africa, for example, 
contain wildebeest, lions, hyenas, giraffes and elephants, as well as zebras 
(Figure C4.1.14). Communities include all the biotic parts of the ecosystem, 
including plants, animals and fungi.
thalli
roots
 
■Figure C4.1.13 Duckweed of the genus 
Lemna covering the surface of a pond, 
and a diagram of duckweed thalli (a leaf 
unit that is over 1.5 mm in diameter)
 
■Figure C4.1.14 A community of wild animals 
congregate around a waterhole in Etosha 
National Park, northern Namibia, Africa
	
◆Community: a group of different species living 
in an area.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
563
Common mistake
Do not confuse the terms ‘population’ and ‘community’. In ecology, these terms have different 
meanings to how they are used in geography, for example. In ecology, a community is many species 
living together, whereas the term population refers to just one species. 
Concept: Interaction
A community is made up of many interacting populations of different species within an 
ecosystem. These interactions maintain stability in the ecosystem.
Competition versus cooperation 
in intraspecific relationships
Interactions within a species may be competitive or cooperative. Competition can be within the 
same species (intraspecific competition) or between different species (interspecific competition). 
Intraspecific competition can be the strongest type of competition because organisms all compete for 
the same resources. 
Many animals have developed complex behaviours of cooperation to minimize the potential impact 
of direct competition. For example, groups of animals maintain dominance hierarchies, which 
reduces fighting and the risk of injury.
Because individuals within the same species share the 
same niche, intraspecific competition can be more intense 
than interspecific competition, where competing species 
have different niches and therefore less overlap in shared 
resources. Within a species, there is competition for limited 
resources such as food, reproductive partners, territory (see 
Figure C4.1.15), water, space and any other resource required 
for survival or reproduction. 
Interactions within a population do not need to be 
competitive. Other interactions involve cooperation between 
members of the population. Although all organisms compete 
for resources, cooperation is widespread. Genes cooperate 
in genomes; cells cooperate in tissues; individuals cooperate 
in societies. For example, hunting animals such as hyenas 
work in cooperative packs (Figure C4.1.16). Hyena groups 
are called clans – a dominant female (or ‘queen’) controls the 
clan, but all individuals benefit from the ability to hunt more 
effectively and kill prey as a group rather than as an individual. 
Such dominance hierarchies and collective action emerge 
from cooperation among individuals, and represent a high 
order of social complexity. Such societies are found in insects, 
mammals and birds, and in unicellular organisms. 
Link
Interspecific 
competition is also 
discussed in Chapter 
B4.2, page 378.
	
◆Intraspecific 
competition: 
competition between 
individuals of the 
same species.
	
◆Interspecific 
competition: 
competition between 
individuals of different 
species.
	
◆Cooperation: the 
action or process of 
working together.
 
■Figure C4.1.15 Intraspecific competition in blue 
wildebeest (Connochaetes taurinus): two males 
competing for territory, Kalahari Desert, South Africa
 
■Figure C4.1.16 Hyena clan showing intraspecific  
cooperation on a hunt


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
564
Insects that work as a group are called social insects, and 
include bees, wasps, ants and termites. In these colonies, a 
single reproductive female is supported by large numbers of 
non-breeding workers (Figure C4.1.17). Because the offspring 
are produced by one female, all offspring are genetically 
similar, and so the whole colony can be seen as one 
‘superorganism’. Seemingly altruistic behaviour, like 
protecting the colony at risk to self, or raising the offspring of 
others instead of trying to reproduce, can be explained by the 
shared genetic inheritance shown by interacting individuals.
Leafcutter ants are found in the rainforests of Central and 
South America. They build nests that can contain thousands 
of compartments (cells) and cover up to 0.5 km2, and a mature 
colony can contain more than 8 million individuals. The ants 
work as a collective, cutting the leaves from plants and taking 
them back to the colony (Figure C4.1.18). They are extremely 
strong insects and can carry 20–50 times their body weight. 
The leaves are fed to the fungus Leucoagaricus gongylophorus, 
which they grow in their nests, cultivating the fungus as a 
farmer would their crop. The ants cannot digest the cellulose 
in the cell walls of plants, but the fungus can. The fungus acts 
as food for the ant larvae. By cooperation, a large number of 
leaf segments can be collected (up to 17% of the vegetation in a 
forest can be harvested by leafcutter ants) and sufficient fungus 
grown to support the colony.
	
◆Altruism: behaviour 
of an animal that benefits 
another at its own 
expense. Biologists call a 
behaviour pattern altruistic 
if it increases the number 
of offspring produced by 
the recipient and decreases 
that of the altruist.
 
■Figure C4.1.17 The queen (marked with dot) of a bee 
colony (Apis mellifera) surrounded by sterile worker bees
 
■Figure C4.1.18 Leafcutter ants (Atta sp.) 
carrying leaves back to a nest
Link
Intraspecific competition is the driving force for evolution by natural selection and is 
discussed in Chapter D4.1, page 783.
Interspecific relationships within communities
When resources are limiting in the environment, organisms must compete for them. Interspecific 
competition may be so intense as to cause the exclusion of one species by another. Examples of 
interspecific competition are species of Paramecium competing for plankton or species of barnacle 
competing for space on the rocky shore.
Herbivory, predation, mutualism, parasitism and pathogenicity are all categories of interspecific 
relationships within communities.
 
■Herbivory
Herbivory is when an organism feeds on a plant. The carrying capacity of herbivores is affected by 
the quantity of plants they feed on. An area abundant in plant resources will have a higher carrying 
capacity for herbivores than an area that has less plant material.
 
■Predation
Predation is when one animal (or sometimes a plant) eats another animal. The number of prey is 
reduced by the predator, lowering the prey’s carrying capacity. The carrying capacity of the predator 
is affected by the prey because the number of predators is reduced when prey become fewer (see 
predator–prey relationships, page 574).
Link
Competitive exclusion 
is discussed in Chapter 
B4.2, page 378.
Link
The definition of 
predation and more 
details are covered 
in Chapter B4.2, 
page 373.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
565
 
■Mutualism
Mutualism (symbiosis) is an interaction in which both species 
derive benefit. Mutualism can increase the carrying capacity of 
both species in the relationship. An example of a mutualistic 
relationship is shown in Figure C4.1.19.
 
■Parasitism
Parasitism is a relationship in which the parasite organism 
benefits at the expense of the host organism from which it 
derives its food. The parasite lowers the carrying capacity of 
the host.
 
■Pathogenicity
Diseases are caused by pathogens, which include bacteria, 
viruses, fungi and single-celled organisms (protistans). 
Pathogenicity is the capacity of a microbe to cause damage 
to a host resulting in disease. A pathogen may reduce the 
carrying capacity of the population it is infecting. Changes 
in the incidence of the pathogen, and therefore the disease, 
can also cause populations to increase and decrease around 
the carrying capacity. The evergreen robber frog (Craugastor 
gollmeri), see Figure C4.1.20, has suffered population declines 
across its habitat range in Costa Rica and Panama. The declines 
have been caused by the amphibian disease chytridiomycosis, 
caused by the fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Over the 
last 30 years, the disease has caused the populations of over 
200 amphibian species to decline in numbers significantly, and 
in some cases the species have become extinct.
	
◆Mutualism: an interaction in which both species derive benefit. This is a specific type of 
symbiotic relationship. 
	
◆Parasitism: a relationship where one organism (the parasite) benefits at the expense of another (the 
host) from which it derives its food.
	
◆Pathogenicity: the capacity of a microbe to cause damage in a host resulting in disease.
	ATL C4.1B 
Consider your own environment. Think of local examples to illustrate the range of ways in which 
species can interact within a community. 
For example, if you live in Malaysia or Indonesia, an example of a parasite could be the Rafflesia 
plant. Rafflesia has the largest flowers in the world, but no leaves. Without leaves, the plant 
cannot photosynthesize, so it grows close by South East Asian vines (Tetrastigma sp.) from which 
it draws the sugars it needs for growth. An example of mutualism would be coral reefs (see 
page 567). The clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosi) is a local predator that hunts small mammals. 
The Asian elephant feeds on vegetation within the rainforest and provides an example of 
herbivory.
Find local examples of each type of ecological interaction, using at least one example for each type 
of interspecific competition. Explain to other students in your class why you have placed them in 
that category.
Link
The definition of 
herbivory and how 
plants resist it are 
covered in Chapter 
B4.2, page 372.
 
■Figure C4.1.19 Mutualism – mushroom of fly agaric fungus 
(Amanita muscaria) takes sugars and amino acids from a tree’s roots 
in return for essential ions, via its hyphae attached below ground
 
■Figure C4.1.20 An evergreen robber frog in the Atlanta 
Botanical Garden’s amphibian conservation laboratory, USA


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
566
Mutualism as an interspecific relationship 
that benefits both species
Concept: Interdependence
In a mutualistic relationship, there is an interdependence between two species from 
which both benefit.
 
■Root nodules in Fabaceae (legume family)
Rhizobium is a bacterium that lives in the root nodules of plants in the legume family (Fabaceae) such 
as clover plants (Figure C4.1.21). Rhizobium associates with roots in a symbiotic relationship. These 
bacteria work in the following way: 
l	 Rhizobium fixes nitrogen gas to form ammonium ions, which are then converted by other bacteria 
to nitrates. The plant benefits from the nitrates. The plant supplies carbohydrates to the bacteria 
in the root nodule. This is very nutritionally expensive for the plant (they lose a source of glucose) 
but it does enable them to live in nitrate-deficient soils. Other plants without this symbiotic 
relationship are not able to survive in such poor soils, so the legume plants are able to exploit a 
niche that other plants cannot. The bacteria need a ready supply of glucose for respiration, which 
supplies the energy to split the triple-bonded nitrogen molecule. The relationship is, therefore, a 
mutualistic and symbiotic one.
l	 Rhizobium is aerobic. Nitrogen fixation needs lots of energy, which requires large amounts of ATP 
that could not be produced in sufficient quantity through anaerobic pathways.
l	 Rhizobium contains an enzyme, nitrogenase, which catalyses nitrogen fixation. This reaction is 
blocked by exposure to oxygen (by competitive inhibition) because nitrogen and oxygen are 
roughly the same size and shape. This means that oxygen exclusion is necessary for nitrogen 
fixation. This problem is solved in Rhizobium in two ways:
l	 Rhizobium has an exceptionally fast and efficient aerobic metabolism, meaning very little 
oxygen builds up in the root nodules.
l	 The root nodule has an oxygen-scavenging chemical called leghaemoglobin which, like 
haemoglobin in blood, has a high affinity for oxygen. Leghaemoglobin removes oxygen from 
the nodule, allowing nitrogen fixation to occur catalysed by nitrogenase.
Top tip!
Farmers plant clover to increase the nitrate content of the soil and plough the crop into the ground 
rather than harvest it. Regular ploughing and good drainage keep conditions in the soil aerobic for 
the Rhizobium.
 
■Figure C4.1.21 Root 
nodules on the roots 
of clover. The nodules 
are created by the 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria 
Rhizobium trifolii. 
The bacteria convert 
atmospheric nitrogen 
into ammonium ions, 
which are then further 
converted by nitrifying 
bacteria into nitrate ions, 
something the clover 
cannot do itself. Nitrate 
can then be absorbed 
by plants and converted 
into a usable organic 
form (amino acids)
	
◆Root nodule: small 
swelling on the root 
of plants that contain 
symbiotic nitrogen-
fixing bacteria.
	
◆Symbiotic: a close 
and long-term biological 
interaction between two 
different species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
567
 
■Mycorrhizae in Orchidaceae (orchid family)
Mycorrhiza is a type of fungus that grows in mutualism with plant species. The hyphae of the 
fungus (Figure C4.1.22a) grow through the soil and can enter plant tissue. Orchids are a group of 
flowering plants in the family Orchidaceae. Mycorrhizae play a key role during orchid germination. 
An orchid seed is very small, with limited food reserves, and so the growing orchid obtains nutrients 
and water from the fungal symbiont. In turn, the mycorrhizae gains photosynthetically-derived 
glucose from the orchid.
 
■Figure C4.1.22 a) SEM of mycorrhizae fungal hyphae, b) lady-slipper orchid (Cypripedium calceolus) is a terrestrial 
orchid that lives in temperate and northern areas and has a symbiotic relationship with mycorrhizae
a
b
One species of orchid, the lady-slipper orchid (Cypripedium calceolus), is a very rare species that is 
under threat (Figure C4.1.22b). To help conserve the species, it has been artificially grown using 
tissue culture techniques. However, it is very difficult to introduce new seedlings from laboratory 
conditions back to the wild due to lack of specific symbiotic mycorrhizae for the slipper orchid. 
	ATL C4.1C 
What other examples of mutualistic relationships are there between plants and mycorrhizae? Find 
an example from your local area or region. What is the interdependence between the plant and 
fungus? Write a summary of the information you find and keep this as a useful case study for 
answering questions.
 
■Corals and zooxanthellae
Coral reefs are created by the symbiotic relationships between two organisms – an animal and an algae. 
The interaction in coral reefs is mutually beneficial; both organisms gain from the relationship. The 
animal that makes the coral reef is a cnidarian – a group that also includes sea anemones and jellyfish. 
Corals are colonial organisms (i.e. made of many individuals of the same species physically connected, 
interdependent on one another) made up of individual polyps, each 1–3 mm in diameter, with stinging 
tentacles arranged around a central mouth (Figure C4.1.23). The polyps are connected to one another 
via a thin layer of tissue, which enables nutrients to be shared between organisms. The polyps secrete 
a protective skeleton of calcium carbonate, which forms the foundation of the coral reef ecosystem. 
The algae (zooxanthellae) live within the cells of the coral’s endodermis (the innermost lining of 
the animal).
	
◆Mycorrhiza (plural, 
Mycorrhizae): a 
fungus that grows in 
association with the roots 
of a plant in a symbiotic 
relationship.
Link
The conditions 
required for coral reef 
formation are covered 
in Chapter B4.1, 
page 353.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
568
zooxanthellae
tentacles with nematocysts
(stinging cells)
anatomy of a coral polyp
mouth
living tissue 
linking polyps
limestone calice
skeleton
gastrovascular cavity
(digestive sac)
nematocyst
 
■Figure C4.1.23 The zooxanthellae living within the polyp 
animal photosynthesize to produce glucose for themselves 
and the coral polyp, and in return are protected 
The coral provides the algae with a protected environment and 
the carbon dioxide needed for photosynthesis (a metabolic waste 
product of respiration in the coral). In return, the algae produce 
oxygen, utilize the coral’s waste carbon dioxide, and provide the 
coral with a food source (the glucose produced by photosynthesis). 
As much as 90% of the organic material manufactured by the 
algae through photosynthesis is transferred to the host coral tissue 
(Figure C4.1.24). 
The zooxanthellae give coral its colour. Several million 
zooxanthellae live and produce pigments in just a few square 
centimetres of coral. The pigments are visible through the 
clear body of the polyp. Zooxanthellae have a range of different 
photosynthetic pigments, which range in colour from golden-
yellow to brown, giving their hosts the same shade. 
sunlight
Sun
plankton
skeleton
polyp
respiration
respiration
nutrients
zooxanthellae
O2
CO2
HCO3
CaCO3
Ca2+
photosynthesis
–
 
■Figure C4.1.24 The symbiotic 
relationship between 
coral and zooxanthellae
Resource competition between 
endemic and invasive species
Alien species are species that are introduced into an area by human activity. Invasive species are 
alien species that have increased rapidly in number, having a negative effect on the environment and 
on native species. 
The success of the grey squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis) at the expense of the red squirrel (Sciurus 
vulgaris) (Figure C4.1.25) is a very good example of an alien species becoming an invasive one. 
The grey squirrel is native to eastern North America and was introduced to the UK in the 1800s. 
Red squirrels are now restricted to just two locations in the UK, having once been widespread 
Link
Further examples of 
alien and invasive 
species, and their 
impacts on the 
current biodiversity 
crisis, are discussed 
in Chapter A4.2, 
page 172. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
569
over much of the country. The grey squirrel has spread rapidly, chiefly by being able to consume a 
wide range of locally growing nuts (including the very common woodland oak tree’s acorn – this 
contains polyphenolic substances that the new arrival can digest, but which the red squirrel cannot). 
Although they have similar niches, with its wider diet, the grey has outbred the red and multiplied 
much faster. This enlarged population has successfully competed for hazelnuts and pine cones 
too (the limited diet of the red squirrel). The grey squirrel is an example of an alien species that 
has a similar niche to an endemic species: because the niches of the grey and red squirrel overlap, 
competitive exclusion can take place with the result that the less-effective competitor declines in 
number or is wiped out.
 
■Figure C4.1.25 The red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) and grey squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis)
A consequence of introducing an alien species may be that both the alien and native species end 
up occupying smaller realized niches due to interspecific competition. If the alien species lacks 
natural predators, it could outcompete the native species and become invasive. Understanding 
the fundamental niche of invasive species can help predict their dispersal patterns and invasion 
success, providing the basis for better-informed conservation and management policies.
	ATL C4.1D 
Select an invasive species from your local area. Create a flow chart showing how the introduction 
of this species has affected populations of endemic species and the management issues that have 
resulted. You need to bring in the following concepts: competition, conservation, fundamental 
and realized niches, and ecosystem management.
6	 Compare and 
contrast, using 
examples, species 
that are endemic 
and those that are 
invasive.
Tests for interspecific competition
Interspecific competition is indicated but not proven if one species is more successful in the absence 
of another. There are a range of possible approaches to research of interspecific competition: laboratory 
experiments, field observations by random sampling and field manipulation by removal of one species.
 
■Investigating competitive exclusion 
American ecologist Joseph Connell examined two species of barnacle – a common animal on 
rocky shores – to investigate the difference between fundamental and realized niche. His study in 
Scotland, UK, used two experiments. Connell had observed that one of the species, Semibalanus 
(Balanus) balanoides, was most abundant on the lower intertidal area and that the other species, 
Link
Niches and 
competitive exclusion 
are discussed in 
Chapter B4.2, 
page 363.
Link
Fundamental and 
realized niches are 
discussed in Chapter 
B4.2, page 377.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
570
Chthamalus stellatus, was most common on the upper intertidal area of the shore. He knew that the 
free-swimming larvae of each species could settle anywhere on the rocky shoreline and grow into 
adult barnacles. He asked the question: ‘Why do Semibalanus and Chthamalus not grow together?’
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
How would you address Connell’s question regarding why Semibalanus and Chthamalus 
do not grow together? What experiments could you do to explain Connell’s observations? 
Think about this now and write down your ideas. What would your variables be 
(including controlled variables)? How would you ensure reliability of your data?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
In his first experiment (Figure C4.1.26), Connell removed Semibalanus from the upper area of 
shore. He found that, over time, no Chthamalus replaced it. His explanation was that Semibalanus 
could not survive in an area that regularly dried out and experienced desiccation due to low tides. 
He concluded that the realized niche of Semibalanus was the same as its fundamental niche.
In his second experiment (also shown in Figure C4.1.26), Connell removed Semibalanus from the 
middle area. He found that over time Chthamalus replaced it. His explanation was that Semibalanus 
was a more successful competitor in the middle intertidal zone and usually excluded Chthamalus. 
year
1
1955
1954
2
5
10
20
40
60
80
In the upper intertidal
zone, removing Semibalanus
had little effect on
survival of Chthamalus.
In the middle intertidal zone,
a much higher number of
Chthamalus survived once
Semibalanus had been removed.
upper intertidal zone
survival of Chthamalus (%)
year
1
1955
1954
2
5
10
20
40
60
80
middle intertidal zone
survival of Chthamalus (%)
Semibalanus removed
Semibalanus present
He concluded that the fundamental niche and realized niche for Chthamalus were not the same, and 
that the species’ realized niche was smaller due to interspecific competition (that is, competition 
between the two species) leading to competitive exclusion (when one species outcompetes and 
excludes another, when their niches overlap).
 
■Figure C4.1.26 Data 
from Joseph Connell’s 
experiment showing the 
effect of Semibalanus 
removal from the upper 
shore (left) and middle/
lower shore (right). 
The left-hand figure 
shows that in the upper 
intertidal zone, removing 
Semibalanus had little 
effect on the survival of 
Chthamalus; the right-
hand figure shows that, 
in the middle/lower 
intertidal zone, a much 
higher percentage of 
Chthamalus survived 
once Semibalanus 
had been removed


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
571
b
high tide
low tide
Chthamalus fundamental niche
a
high tide
low tide
fundamental niches
realized niches
ocean
Chthamalus
Semibalanus
Semibalanus sp. (left-hand
photo), easily crowded out
from more exposed
positions on the shore, and
Chthamalus sp. (right-hand
photo), able to withstand
prolonged exposure and so
can survive higher on rocky
shorelines.
 
■Figure C4.1.27 a) Two species of barnacle in the intertidal region along the Scottish coast show stratified distribution. 
Competition between the two species explains the distinction between the fundamental niche and realized niche for each organism.  
b) The results of Connell’s second experiment. When Semibalanus were removed from the middle zone of the rocky shore, the 
Chthamalus population moved into that area, indicating that the fundamental niche of Chthamalus covered both the upper and middle 
zones of shore. Competition between the two species usually excluded the Chthamalus and restricted it to its observed realized niche
Tool 2: Technology
Using computer modelling
Read more about Connell’s experiment using this site: https://virtualbiologylab.org/
ModelsHTML5/BarnacleCompetition/BarnacleCompetitionModel.html
Recreate the experiment using the simulation feature. Gather your own data 
and compare them with Connell’s. Do you reach the same conclusion about the 
fundamental and realized niches of both species?
Restriction of two species due to interspecific competition
Connell’s experiments with barnacles show the elimination of a species that has a similar 
fundamental niche to another species in the same area. In other cases, competing species can 
coexist but with restrictions with both species. For example, in Africa, leopards and lions display 
interspecific competition, since both species feed on the same prey. When they coexist in the 
same area, they each negatively impact the presence of the other because both will have less food. 
The result is the restriction of both species as an outcome of competition.
Top tip!
Elimination of one of 
the competing species 
or the restriction of 
both to a part of their 
fundamental niche are 
both possible outcomes 
of competition between 
two species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
572
Nature of science: Hypotheses
A hypothesis is a provisional explanation of an observed phenomenon or event that can be 
investigated using the scientific method. When making a hypothesis, the investigator proposes how 
an independent variable may affect a dependent variable. A hypothesis is a testable prediction 
(ideally quantitative) of how you think an independent variable and a dependent variable are causally 
related. A hypothesis includes a scientific explanation (often involving a reference to a scientific 
model) of how the two variables are related. For example, you might be planning to investigate the 
relationship between temperature and the rate of fermentation of brewer’s yeast. Your hypothesis 
might be that, as temperature increases, the rate of fermentation is expected to increase 
exponentially up to an optimum temperature and then decrease rapidly (in a curved manner) to zero.
Hypotheses can be tested by both experiments and observations. An experiment changes one 
variable (the independent variable) and measures the effect on the dependent variable. All other 
variables are kept the same (they are controlled), unless this is not possible, for example in ecological 
investigations. In these cases, other variables that may affect the dependent variable are monitored. 
Observations are qualitative rather than quantitative, and also provide evidence for the hypothesis. 
An experiment with controlled variables is better support for a hypothesis than simple observations. 
For example, in Joseph Connell’s investigation of the fundamental and realized niches of barnacles, 
he observed that one of the species was most abundant on the lower intertidal area and that the 
other was most common on the upper intertidal area of the shore. However, it was only by removing 
each species of barnacle from their respective zones on the shore that he was able to demonstrate 
the fundamental niches of both species and how they compare to their realized niches. 
	
◆Hypothesis: a 
provisional explanation of 
an observed phenomenon 
or event that can be 
investigated using the 
scientific method; when 
using a statistical test, 
the hypothesis states 
that there is a statistically 
significant difference 
between two variables.
Using the chi-squared test for 
association between two species
Quadrats can be used to record the presence or absence in each quadrat of two species under 
investigation. The data are then subjected to a statistical test called the chi-squared (χ2) test. It is 
used to examine data that fall into discrete categories (as in this case). It tests the significance of 
the deviations between numbers observed (O) in an investigation and the number expected (E). 
The measure of deviation, known as chi-squared, is converted into a probability value using a chi-
squared table. In this way, we can decide whether the differences observed between our sets of data 
are likely to be real or, alternatively, obtained just by chance. 
You need to be able to apply chi-squared tests on the presence or absence of two species in several 
sampling sites, exploring the differences or similarities in distribution. This may provide evidence for 
interspecific competition.
 
■Applying and interpreting appropriate tests of 
statistical significance 
All ecological statistical techniques involve hypothesis testing. They test a statement called the null 
hypothesis. Statistical analyses test whether data match the null hypothesis or significantly vary 
from it. Where data are being compared, the null hypothesis states that ‘there is no difference 
between the sets of data’ and, when an association is being investigated, it states that ‘there is no 
association’. The alternative hypothesis is the ‘opposite’ of the null hypothesis, i.e. that there is a 
difference or association shown by the data. 
	
◆Null hypothesis: 
there is no statistically 
significant difference 
between two variables.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
573
Tool 3: Mathematics
Applying the chi-squared test to test for an 
association between two moorland species
This example examines whether the moorland species 
bell heather (Erica cinerea) and common heather, also 
known as ling (Calluna vulgaris), tend to occur together. 
Moorlands are upland areas with acidic and low-nutrient 
soils, where heather plants dominate. Heathers have 
long woody stems and grow in dense clumps. They 
have colourful, bright flowers. Is there a statistically 
significant association between ling and bell heather on 
an area of moorland? As scientists, we would carry out 
a statistical test to work out the probability of getting 
results that indicate there is no association between 
the two species – indicating the null hypothesis is 
true. The null hypothesis in this example would be that 
there is no statistically significant association between 
bell heather and ling in an area of moorland; that is, 
their distributions are independent of each other. If our 
results do not support the null hypothesis, then there is 
an association.
a
c
b
 
■Figure C4.1.28 a) A moorland ecosystem and 
two common plants found there: b) ling (Calluna 
vulgaris) and c) bell heather (Erica cinerea)
1 The measurements and results
To sample the two species, the presence or absence 
of each species was recorded in each of 200 quadrats. 
The quadrats were located at random on a 100 m by 
100 m area of moorland (Table C4.1.3).
 
■Table C4.1.3 Observed results – the 
distribution of ling and bell heather
Bell heather 
present
Bell heather 
absent
Total
Ling present
89
45
134
Ling absent
31
35
66
120
80
200
2 The calculations
a) Expected results: assuming that the two species 
are randomly distributed with respect to each other, 
the probability of ling being present in a quadrat is:
column total
total number of quadrats = 134
200 = 0.67
Similarly, the probability of bell heather being present 
in a quadrat is:
120
200 = 0.60
The probability of both species occurring together, 
assuming random distribution between each species, 
is: 0.60 × 0.67 = 0.40. The number of quadrats in 
which both species can be expected is therefore 
0.40 × 200 = 80.
Having calculated the number of expected quadrats 
where the species are found together, other expected 
values can be calculated by subtracting from the totals. 
For example, the expected number of quadrats with 
bell heather but no ling is 120 − 80 = 40. Expected 
values follow the assumption that totals for each row 
and column do not change, because the relationship 
shown by the data is assumed to represent the true 
relative frequency of each species (Table C4.1.4). 
 
■Table C4.1.4 The full expected results
Bell heather 
present
Bell heather 
absent
Total
Ling present
80
54
134
Ling absent
40
26
66
120
80
200

➜


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
574
Calculated values can be checked by using the 
ratios represented in the table of observed results 
(Table C4.1.3). 
For example, the expected number of quadrats where 
there is no ling and no bell heather can be calculated 
as follows:
Probability of no ling in a quadrat = 66 ÷ 200 = 0.33
Probability of no bell heather in a quadrat =  
80 ÷ 200 = 0.40
Probability of neither species in a quadrat = 
0.33 × 0.40 = 0.13
Number of expected quadrats with neither species 
present = 0.13 × 200 = 26 
(Note that this figure agrees with the estimated value in 
Table C4.1.4).
b) Statistical test: the observed and expected results 
are recorded in Table C4.1.5.
 
■Table C4.1.5 Observed (O) and expected (E) 
distribution of ling and bell heather
Bell heather 
present
Bell heather 
absent
Total
Ling present
O
E
89
80
45
54
134
Ling absent
O
E
31
40
35
26
66
120
80
200
Then, chi-squared is calculated from the formula: 
χ2 = ∑(O – E)2
E
So, chi-squared in this example: 
= (89 – 80)2
80
 + (45 – 54)2
54
 + (31 – 40)2
40
 + (35 – 26)2
26
= 1.01 + 1.50 + 2.03 + 3.11
= 7.65
To find whether this result is statistically significant 
or not, the value must be compared to a critical 
value (Table C4.1.6). To locate the critical value, the 
appropriate degrees of freedom need to be calculated. 
Degrees of freedom = (number of columns − 1) × 
(number of rows − 1)
In this case, degrees of freedom = (2 − 1) × (2 − 1) = 1
 
■Table C4.1.6 Critical values for the χ2 test
Degrees of freedom
0.05 level of significance
1
3.84
2
5.99
3
7.81
4
9.49
The chi-squared value of 7.65 is larger than the critical 
value of 3.84 for 1 degree of freedom at the probability 
level of p = 0.05 (the 5% probability level). The null 
hypothesis is therefore rejected; there is a statistically 
significant association between bell heather and ling 
in this area of moorland. So, the distributions of the 
two species are not independent of each other – the 
distribution of the two species is associated.
c) The value of chi-squared may also be obtained 
using a programmed calculator or a computer program 
such as: www.socscistatistics.com/tests/chisquare/
Default2.aspx
Predator–prey relationships
In Chapter B3.3, different reasons for locomotion were discussed, including escaping from danger. 
Figure B3.3.18b, page 338, shows a snowshoe hare running from a lynx. In this interaction, the 
snowshoe hare is the prey and the lynx the predator. Such an interaction is known as a predator–
prey relationship.
	
◆Predator–prey 
relationship: the inter-
relationship of population 
sizes due to predation of 
one species (the predator) 
on another (the prey).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
575
year
numbers / thousands
0
160
100
60
20
1845
1945
1855
1865
1885
1875
140
80
40
1895
1905
1915
1925
120
1935
lynx
snowshoe
hare
Key
 
■Figure C4.1.29 The snowshoe hare and lynx: an example of a predator–prey relationship
Predator–prey relationships are an example of density-dependent (see page 557) control of 
animal populations. 
These predator–prey interactions are often controlled by negative feedback mechanisms (see 
page 557) that control population densities (Figure C4.1.29). In the relative absence of the predatory 
lynx (due to a limited prey population), the population of snowshoe hare begins to increase in size. 
As the availability of prey increases, there is an increase in predator numbers, after a time-lag. As the 
number of predators increases, the population size of the prey begins to decrease, again after a time-
lag. With fewer prey, the number of predators decreases again. With fewer predators, the number of 
prey may begin to increase again, and the cycle continues. 
Predation may actually be good for the prey: it removes old and sick individuals first as these 
organisms are easier to catch. Those remaining are healthier and form a superior breeding pool.
Common mistake
The term ‘negative’ does not mean that the feedback loop is detrimental to the environment. Quite 
the opposite – it usually counteracts deviation away from steady-state equilibrium. The term ‘positive’ 
does not mean that the feedback loop has a constructive effect on the environment. Positive feedback 
increases change in a system, leading to it moving further away from steady-state equilibrium.
Top-down and bottom-up control 
of populations in communities
A trophic level is a feeding level within a food chain (see Chapter C4.2, page 582). In top-down 
control, a higher trophic level influences the community structure of a lower trophic level through 
predation. This approach is also called a predator-controlled food web. Figure C4.1.30a shows how 
reduction in the top predator leads to an increase in the number of prey that it feeds on, which in 
turn leads to a reduction in zooplankton (small floating or weakly swimming organisms that live in 
the ocean). Reduction in zooplankton has a knock-on effect on phytoplankton (algae and 
photosynthetic bacteria), leading to population growth due to decreased predation.
7	 Describe the 
role of negative 
feedback 
mechanisms in a 
named example 
of predator–prey 
relationships.
Link
Trophic levels and 
food chains are 
covered in Chapter 
C4.2, page 578.
	
◆Top-down control: 
changes to the food chain 
occur at the top trophic 
level and then impact on 
the trophic levels lower in 
the food chain.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
576
Bottom-up control means that a lower trophic level in an ecosystem affects the community 
structure of higher trophic levels through resource restriction. Limitation is placed by resources that 
allow growth, such as food source, habitat or space. Figure C4.1.30b shows bottom-up control in a 
marine ecosystem. In this system, reduction in the producers (phytoplankton) leads to a reduction in 
all subsequent levels of the food chain.
While both top-down and bottom-up controls are possible, one or the other is likely to be dominant 
in a community.
a Top-down control – hunting reduces
   numbers of top predators
b Bottom-up control – extreme weather
    reduces numbers of phytoplankton
effect
predators
reaction
reaction
reaction
time
time
forage fish
zooplankton
phytoplankton
effect
predators
reaction
reaction
reaction
forage fish
zooplankton
phytoplankton
abundance
abundance
 
■Figure C4.1.30 a) Top-down control in the food chain for four trophic levels in a marine ecosystem,  
b) bottom-up control, or control through primary production, in a simplified four-level food chain in a marine ecosystem
Allelopathy and secretion of antibiotics
 
■Allelopathy
Competition in plants can be severe and lead to the reduction in carrying capacity of both species if 
the competition is interspecific. Mechanisms that give one plant an advantage over another have 
evolved, such as allelopathy. The word is derived from the Greek words ‘allelon’, which means ‘each 
other’, and ‘pathos’, which means ‘to suffer’ (note – the term ‘pathogen’, meaning organisms that 
cause disease in another organisms, also has this origin). Allelopathy in plants is where a chemical 
compound (allelochemical) is used by one species to suppress the other and take advantage of that 
suppression. Allelopathic plants create adverse conditions for other neighbouring, competitor plants 
by reducing their seed germination, seedling growth or growth of the plant. Some allelochemicals 
change the amount of chlorophyll production in a plant and therefore slow down or stop 
photosynthesis, which leads to the suppression or death of the plant.
Allelopathy can be carried out by plants by the following processes:
l	 releasing chemical compounds (allelochemicals) from their roots into the soil: these chemicals 
suppress or kill neighbouring plants when they are absorbed
l	 releasing allelochemicals in a gaseous form from the stomata in the leaves: when the 
neighbouring plants absorb these gases, they are suppressed or killed
l	 leaves dropping from allelopathic plants: these contain toxic chemicals which, when the leaves 
decompose, are released and inhibit the growth of competitors.
	
◆Bottom-up control: 
changes to the food 
chain occur at the lowest 
trophic level (producers) 
and then impact on the 
trophic levels higher in 
the food chain.
8	 Distinguish 
between top-
down and bottom-
up control of 
populations in 
communities.
	
◆Allelopathy: chemical 
inhibition of one plant 
(or other organism) by 
another, due to the 
release of chemicals 
(allelochemicals) that act 
as germination or growth 
inhibitors.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.1   Populations and communities
577
9	 Using examples, 
outline how 
allelopathy is used 
by plants to give 
a competitive 
advantage over 
other species in 
their habitat.
10	Define the term 
allelopathy.
 
■Figure C4.1.32 The common bracken fern (Pteridium 
aquilinum), which excludes other plants from areas 
that it grows in with its allelopathic properties
 
■Figure C4.1.31 Broccoli – an example of an allelopathic plant
All brassica plants, such as cabbage, mustard, kale and radish, have allelopathic properties. Mustard, 
for example, can suppress fungal pathogens. Extracts of black mustard can limit the germination of 
some legumes, such as lentils, as well as oats. Broccoli (Figure C4.1.31) can be allelopathic to 
later-planted broccoli or any other crops in the brassica family. Farmers growing broccoli therefore 
rotate to other crops (i.e. alternate the crop so that broccoli is not grown every year) and do not plant 
other brassicas where broccoli have recently been grown.
Ferns are also allelopathic. Bracken (Pteridium aquilinum, Figure C4.1.32), for example, competitively 
excludes other plants by allelopathy, making it the dominant species in the areas where it is found. 
This dominance reduces the biodiversity of the ecosystem because other plants cannot grow in the 
presence of the bracken. Associated plants are often severely inhibited or even excluded from dense 
stands of the fern. 
 
■Secretion of antibiotics
The first mass-produced antibiotic for the treatment of human bacterial disease was penicillin, 
derived from the Penicillium fungi. Penicillin was accidently discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1929 
(see Figure C3.2.15, page 533) while studying Staphylococcus, the bacterium that causes boils and 
sore throats. Fungi naturally produce antibiotics to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria, which limits 
the competition with the fungi. The fungi is allelopathic, producing chemicals that scientists call 
antibiotics to kill and inhibit the growth of bacteria: these properties have been taken advantage of to 
produce antibiotics as medicines.
Top tip!
Allelopathy and the secretion of antibiotics are similar processes in that a chemical substance is 
released into the environment to deter potential competitors.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the benefits of models in studying biology?
2	 What factors can limit capacity in biological systems? 
	ATL C4.1E 
Find out about 
allelopathic plants 
in your area. How 
do they inhibit 
competitors? Produce 
a fact sheet on at least 
three different named 
species of plant.
Link
Antibiotics and 
penicillin are covered 
in more detail 
in Chapter C3.2, 
page 532.
