Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
578
C4.2
Transfers of energy and matter
•	 What is the reason matter can be recycled in ecosystems but energy cannot?
•	 How is the energy that is lost by each group of organisms in an ecosystem replaced?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 C4.2.1 	 Ecosystems as open systems in which both energy and matter can enter and exit
	 C4.2.2 	 Sunlight as the principal source of energy that sustains most ecosystems
	 C4.2.3 	 Flow of chemical energy through food chains
	 C4.2.4 	 Construction of food chains and food webs to represent feeding relationships in 
a community
	 C4.2.5 	 Supply of energy to decomposers as carbon compounds in organic matter 
coming from dead organisms
	 C4.2.6 	 Autotrophs as organisms that use external energy sources to synthesize carbon 	
compounds from simple inorganic substances
	 C4.2.7 	 Use of light as the external energy source in photoautotrophs and oxidation 
reactions as the energy source in chemoautotrophs
	 C4.2.8 	 Heterotrophs as organisms that use carbon compounds obtained from other 
organisms to synthesize the carbon compounds that they require
	 C4.2.9 	 Release of energy in both autotrophs and heterotrophs by oxidation of carbon 
compounds in cell respiration
	 C4.2.10 	Classification of organisms into trophic levels
	 C4.2.11 	Construction of energy pyramids
	 C4.2.12 	Reductions in energy availability at each successive stage in food chains due to 
large energy losses between trophic levels
	 C4.2.13 	Heat loss to the environment in both autotrophs and heterotrophs due to 
conversion of chemical energy to heat in cell respiration
	 C4.2.14 	Restrictions on the number of trophic levels in ecosystems due to energy losses
	 C4.2.15 	Primary production as accumulation of carbon compounds in biomass 
by autotrophs
	 C4.2.16 	Secondary production as accumulation of carbon compounds in biomass by 
heterotrophs
	 C4.2.17 	Constructing carbon cycle diagrams
	 C4.2.18 	Ecosystems as carbon sinks and carbon sources
	 C4.2.19 	Release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere during combustion of biomass, 
peat, coal, oil and natural gas
	 C4.2.20	Analysis of the Keeling curve in terms of photosynthesis, respiration 
and combustion
	 C4.2.21 	Dependence of aerobic respiration on atmospheric oxygen produced by 
photosynthesis, and of photosynthesis on atmospheric carbon dioxide produced 
by respiration
	 C4.2.22	Recycling of all chemical elements required by living organisms in ecosystems
Note: There is no higher-level only content in C4.2.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
579
Ecosystems as open systems
An ecosystem is defined as a community of organisms and their surroundings, the environment 
in which they live and with which they interact. It is a basic functional unit of ecology since 
the organisms that make up a community cannot realistically be considered apart from their 
physical environment.
Examples such as a woodland or a lake illustrate two important features of an ecosystem, namely 
that it is:
l	 a largely self-contained unit, since most organisms of the ecosystem spend their entire lives there 
and their essential nutrients are endlessly recycled around and through it
l	 an interactive system, in that the kinds of organism that live there are largely decided by the 
physical environment, and the physical environment is constantly altered by the organisms. 
The organisms of an ecosystem are called the biotic component, and the physical environment 
is known as the abiotic component. Within any ecosystem, organisms are normally found in a 
particular part or habitat. 
Ecosystems are open systems because both energy and matter can enter and exit (Figure C4.2.1). 
It is this constant input of energy that sustains the ecosystem, and although matter is recycled (see 
page 601) organisms can bring matter into and out from these natural systems. In contrast, a closed 
system exchanges only energy across its boundary. Closed systems only exist experimentally, 
although the global geochemical cycles (such as the carbon cycle – see page 594) approximate to 
closed systems.
open system
energy in
a
b
matter in
matter out
energy out
surroundings
closed system
energy out
energy in
no matter transfer
surroundings
 
■Figure C4.2.1 The exchange of matter and energy across the boundaries of different systems. An 
open system (a) exchanges both energy and matter, whereas a closed system (b) exchanges only energy
Sunlight as the principal source of 
energy that sustains most ecosystems
Think of an ecosystem with which you are very familiar. Perhaps it is one near your home, school or 
college. It might be savannah, a forest, a lake, woodland or meadow. Whatever you have in mind, 
it will certainly contain a community of plants, animals and micro-organisms, all engaged in their 
characteristic activities. Some of these organisms will be much easier to observe than others, possibly 
because of their size or the times of day (or night) at which they feed, for example.
The essence of survival of organisms is their activity. To carry out their activities, organisms need 
energy. We have already seen that the immediate source of energy in cells is the molecule ATP 
(page 405), which is produced by respiration. The energy of ATP has been transferred from sugar 
and other organic molecules – the respiratory substrates. These organic molecules are obtained from 
nutrients because of the organism’s mode of nutrition.
Concept: 
Interaction
A community forms 
an ecosystem by 
its interactions 
with the non-
living (abiotic) 
environment. 
Link
Habitats are covered 
in Chapter B4.1, 
page 341.
	
◆Open system: system 
where both energy and 
matter can enter and exit.
	
◆Closed system: 
system where only energy 
can pass in and out, not 
matter.
1	 Distinguish 
between an open 
and closed system.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
580
The ultimate source of energy for most food chains is sunlight: this is the principal source of energy 
that sustains most ecosystems. Energy from sunlight is trapped by chlorophyll or other 
photosynthetic pigments and used ultimately to synthesize glucose. In this way, light energy is 
transformed into a store of chemical energy. Organisms that can trap energy in glucose are called 
producers. This chemical energy is then used to synthesize ATP, which is used in all life processes.
Not all food chains begin with the input of sunlight energy. Exceptions include ecosystems in 
caves and those in the ocean below the level light can reach, such as hydrothermal vents (see 
Chapter A2.1, page 47). Producers in these ecosystems synthesize glucose using energy from 
chemical reactions (see page 48). 
Nature of science: Theories
Laws in science are generalized principles, or rules of thumb, created to describe patterns observed 
in living organisms. Unlike theories, they do not offer explanations, but describe phenomena. 
The term ‘law’ is sometimes used for statements that allow predictions to be made about natural 
phenomena without explaining them. Like theories, laws can be used to make predictions. You 
need to be able to outline the features of useful generalizations. For example, it is a generalization 
to say that ‘sunlight is the principal source of energy that sustains ecosystems’ because some food 
chains use other sources of energy. It is a useful generalization because most food chains do obtain 
energy in this way, although it would be more accurate to say that ‘sunlight is the principal source 
of energy that sustains most ecosystems’.
Flow of chemical energy through food chains
Unlike matter, which cycles through ecosystems, energy enters an ecosystem, usually as sunlight, 
and leaves it as heat (Figure C4.2.2). Energy does not cycle but is conserved; it is not available to be 
reused by living organisms as it is lost from ecosystems. 
Energy enters the food chain from sunlight
and leaves as heat energy lost to space.
primary consumers
herbivores
primary producers
green plants
inorganic matter
sunlight
detritivores and saprotrophs
cycling of materials
food chain as pyramid of biomass showing energy flow
(Note: materials are recycled)
flow of chemical energy
flow of energy as light or heat
secondary
consumers
carnivores
 
■Figure C4.2.2 Cycling of nutrients and the flow of energy within an ecosystem
	
◆Producer: an 
autotrophic organism that 
can synthesize glucose; 
a photosynthetic green 
plant or chemosynthetic 
bacterium, forming the 
first trophic level in a 
food chain.
Top tip!
You need to be clear 
about the distinction 
between one-way 
flow of energy in 
ecosystems and the 
cycling of inorganic 
nutrients.
	ATL C4.2A 
EO Wilson (1929–
2021), an American 
biologist and 
naturalist, proposed 
two fundamental laws 
of biology: 
1	 All the phenomena 
of biology are 
ultimately obedient 
to the laws of 
chemistry and 
physics. 
2	 All the phenomena 
of biology have 
arisen by evolution 
through natural 
selection. 
To what extent do you 
agree or disagree with 
Wilson’s proposal? 
Discuss with a partner.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
581
Tool 3: Mathematics
Representing energy flow in the form of food chains
A feeding relationship in which a carnivore eats a 
herbivore, which itself has eaten plant matter, is called 
a food chain. In Figure C4.2.3, light is the initial energy 
source. Note that, in a food chain, the arrows point to the 
consumers and so indicate the direction of energy flow. 
Food chains are simple models that represent the flow 
of energy through ecosystems. Chemical energy passes 
to a consumer as it feeds on an organism that is the 
previous stage in the food chain, for example from the 
oak beauty caterpillar to the caterpillar-hunting beetle.
oak
Quercus robur
oak beauty
caterpillar
Biston strataria
caterpillar-
hunting beetle
Carabus nemoralis
common
shrew
Sorex araneus
red fox
Vulpes vulpes
 
■Figure C4.2.3 A food chain
	ATL C4.2B 
Construct a food chain for two named ecosystems – tropical rainforest and savannah. Make 
sure you include both the common name and scientific name for each species (as shown in 
Figure C4.2.3). Don’t forget that arrows indicate energy flow in your diagrams. You do not need 
to include pictures of the organisms, just their names.
Food chains and food webs represent 
feeding relationships in a community
In an ecosystem, food chains are not isolated. Rather, they interconnect with other chains.  
This is because most prey species have to escape the attentions of more than one predator. 
Predators, as well as having preferences, need to exploit alternative food sources when one source 
becomes limited. They also take full advantage of gluts of food as particular prey populations 
become temporarily abundant.
Consequently, individual food chains may be temporary and are interconnected so that they may 
form a food web. An example of a marine food web is shown in Figure C4.2.4. As before with food 
chains, the arrows indicate the direction of the transfer of energy and biomass.
Food chains tell us about the feeding relationships of organisms in an ecosystem, but they are 
entirely qualitative relationships (we know which organisms are present as prey and as predators), 
rather than providing quantitative data (we do not know the numbers of organisms at each level).
Concept: Interdependence
Changes in the population of one species in a food chain or web can affect the 
populations of other organisms. Organisms higher in a food chain depend on those 
lower down as sources of food, for example. If one essential organism is removed from 
the chain, perhaps resulting from human impacts such as habitat loss, then the food 
web could collapse, endangering the entire ecosystem.
	
◆Food chain: sequence 
of organisms within a 
community in which 
each is the food (and, 
hence, energy source) of 
the next, starting with a 
producer.
	
◆Consumer: organisms 
that are unable to 
synthesize glucose and 
so eat other organisms or 
organic matter to obtain 
it and other nutrients.
	
◆Food web: 
interconnected food 
chains in an ecological 
community.
Common 
mistake
Arrows in food chains 
indicate energy 
flow and not which 
organism is eating 
which. Arrows in 
food chains go from 
producer → primary 
consumer → secondary 
consumer, and so on.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
582
star fish
seaweeds,
e.g. sea lettuce
lobster
dog whelk
herring gull
phytoplankton
zooplankton
seal
pollack
limpet
common mussel
grey mullet
sea urchin
 
■Figure C4.2.4 Example of a marine food web
 
■Trophic levels
Food chains show a sequence of organisms in which each is the food of the next organism in the 
chain, so each organism represents a feeding or trophic level. Chains typically start with a producer 
and end with a consumer – perhaps a secondary or tertiary consumer. 
There is not a fixed number of trophic levels in a food chain, but typically there are three, four or five 
levels only. There is an important reason why stable food chains remain quite short. We will come 
back to this point shortly.
Supply of energy to decomposers as carbon 
compounds in dead organic matter
Organisms that feed on dead plants and animals, and on the waste matter of animals, are 
decomposers.
Producers support all ecosystems through constant input of energy and new biomass. Decomposers 
feed at each trophic level of a food chain and are essential for recycling matter, including elements 
such as carbon and nitrogen, in ecosystems (page 601, this section). Feeding by decomposers 
releases inorganic nutrients from the dead organic matter, including carbon dioxide, water and 
ammonia, and ions such as nitrates and phosphates. Sooner or later, these inorganic nutrients are 
absorbed by producers and reused (Figure C4.2.5). We will look in more detail at the cycling of 
nutrients in the biosphere below and later in this chapter.
2	 Using the 
information in the 
food web in Figure 
C4.2.4, construct 
two individual food 
chains from the 
marine ecosystem, 
each with at least 
three linkages (four 
organisms).
3	 Identify the initial 
energy source 
for almost all 
communities.
	
◆Trophic level: feeding 
level within a food chain.
	
◆Decomposer: 
organisms (typically 
micro-organisms) that 
feed on dead plant and 
animal material, causing 
matter to be recycled by 
other living things.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
583
Common mistake
The terms ‘decomposer’ and ‘detritivore’ are often used interchangeably. Although ‘decomposer’ 
can be used to include all organisms that feed on dead biomass and waste from organisms, the 
term can also be used to refer specifically to micro-organisms that carry out saprotrophic nutrition 
(known as saprotrophs). Detritivores, in contrast, eat the detritus (dead or waste plant and animal 
material) and process it in their intestines. Decomposers include bacteria and fungi, and detritivores 
include earthworms and woodlice. Matter consumed by decomposers and detritivores includes 
faeces, dead parts of organisms and dead whole organisms.
Link
Saprotrophic 
nutrition is described 
in Chapter B4.2, 
page 367.
producers
decomposers
elements (e.g. carbon,
nitrogen) in the environment
(inorganic molecules)
elements in biomass
(organic molecules)
 
■Figure C4.2.5 The role of producers and decomposers in ecosystems
 
■Cycling of nutrients
Recycling of nutrients is essential for the survival of living things because the available resources 
of many elements are limited. When organisms die, their bodies are broken down into simpler 
substances (for example, carbon dioxide, water, ammonia and various ions), as illustrated in 
Figure C4.2.6. Nutrients are released.
1 break up
of animal body by
scavengers and detritivores,
e.g. carrion crow, magpie, fox
1 break up
of plant body by detritivores,
e.g. slugs and snails, earthworms,
wood-boring insects
2 succession of micro-organisms
– mainly bacteria, feeding:
• ﬁrstly on simple nutrients
 such as sugars, amino acids,
 fatty acids
• secondly on polysaccharides,
 proteins, lipids
• thirdly on resistant molecules 
 of the body, such as keratin
 and collagen
2 succession of micro-organisms
– mainly fungi, feeding:
• ﬁrstly on simple nutrients
 such as sugars, amino acids,
 fatty acids
• secondly on polysaccharides,
 proteins, lipids
• thirdly on resistant molecules 
 such as cellulose and lignin
3 release of simple 
inorganic molecules
such as CO2, H2O, NH3,
and ions such as Na+, K+, 
Ca2+, NO3
–, PO4
–, 
all available to be
reabsorbed by plant 
roots for reuse
dead animal
dead plant
 
■Figure C4.2.6 The sequence of organisms involved in decay


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
584
Detritivores begin the process of breakdown and decay, but saprotrophic bacteria and fungi 
(decomposers) always complete the breakdown. Elements that are released may become part of 
the soil solution, and some may react with chemicals of soil or rock particles, before becoming 
part of living things again through reabsorption and assimilation by plants. Ultimately, both plants 
and animals depend on the activities of saprotrophic micro-organisms to release matter from dead 
organisms for reuse.
The complete range of recycling processes by which essential elements are released and reused 
involve both living things (the biota) and the non-living (abiotic) environment. The latter consists 
of the atmosphere, hydrosphere (oceans, rivers and lakes) and lithosphere (rocks and soil). All the 
essential elements take part in such cycles. One example is the carbon cycle (page 594).
The supply of inorganic nutrients in an ecosystem is finite and limited as usually there are no 
new inputs from outside the ecosystem, but recycling does ensure their continuous availability. 
By contrast, there is a continuous, but variable, supply of energy in the form of sunlight. We focus 
on this next.
Autotrophs
Energy flow through ecosystems depends on the interrelationship between organisms that can trap 
and store energy in the form of glucose, and those that release energy through respiration.
Energy is required for carbon fixation (photosynthesis) and for the anabolic reactions that synthesize 
macromolecules, such as condensation reactions that produce polysaccharides, polypeptides and 
nucleic acids. We know that green plants make their own organic nutrients from an external supply 
of inorganic molecules, in general using energy from sunlight in photosynthesis. The nutrition 
of a typical green plant is described as autotrophic, meaning ‘self-feeding’. There are a very few 
exceptions to this, for example carnivorous plants and the species discussed in the Nature of 
science box below (Figure C4.2.7). The great majority of green plants are entirely autotrophic in their 
nutrition and in this way play a key part in food chains (see below).
Nature of science: Patterns and trends
The statement ‘all plants are autotrophic’ is 
a generalization. Scientists, while looking for 
patterns or trends and trying to draw general 
conclusions by inductive reasoning, also look for 
discrepancies. Broomrape (Orobanche sp.) is a 
‘root parasite’, attaching to the root systems of its 
various host plants, below ground. Above ground, 
the shoots are virtually colourless (chlorophyll-free), 
and the leaves reduced to small bracts. This plant 
is heterotrophic rather than autotrophic. Why?
Once established, the plant is seen to concentrate 
on reproduction, seed production and seed 
dispersal. This suggests that the task of reaching 
fresh hosts is a major challenge in the life cycle of 
a parasite. Which of these features are evident in 
the plant shown here?
 
■Figure C4.2.7 Not quite all 
green plants are autotrophic
Link
How a species feeds 
is an important part 
of its niche and is 
covered in Chapter 
B4.2, page 363.
Link
The definition of 
autotroph and more 
details are given 
in Chapter B4.2, 
page 366.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
585
Photoautotrophs and chemoautotrophs
Producers make their own glucose and convert (fix) inorganic molecules into organic molecules. 
Plants, algae and some bacteria are producers. There are two different types of producer.
l	 Photoautotrophs (e.g. nearly all plants) transfer solar energy into chemical energy.
l	 Chemoautotrophs (e.g. nitrifying bacteria) use chemical energy from oxidation reactions to 
create glucose.
Redox reactions release energy, and so are useful in living organisms. Both respiration and 
photosynthesis use redox reactions. Light is used as the external energy source in photoautotrophs, 
while oxidation reactions are the energy source in chemoautotrophs. 
Iron-oxidizing bacteria are an example of a chemoautotroph. Common iron-oxidizing bacteria, 
including Gallionella, Sphaerotilus, Crenothrix and Leptothrix species, oxidize iron(ii) ions (Fe2+) to 
iron(iii) ions (Fe3+) to obtain energy for the synthesis of glucose. Iron-oxidizing bacteria take iron 
atoms out of water and remove electrons to release energy for metabolic processes.
Heterotrophs
In contrast to green plants, animals and most other types of organism are consumers, using only 
existing organic matter. Consumers do not contain photosynthetic pigments (e.g. chlorophyll) and so 
cannot make their own food. They must obtain the energy, minerals and nutrients they need by eating 
other organisms. They are also known as heterotrophs. The complex carbon compounds, such as 
proteins and starch, are digested to monomers, which are later used by the organism to synthesize 
their own polymers. Monomers, such as amino acids and glucose, are obtained by digestion and 
absorbed into heterotrophs’ cells and are assimilated by constructing the carbon compounds required. 
Digestion can be internal or external, however absorption is always into cells. Energy and biomass are 
passed through a food chain from the producers through to the top carnivores. Consequently, animal 
nutrition is dependent on plant nutrition, either directly or indirectly.
Note that some of the consumers, known as herbivores, feed directly and exclusively on plants 
(page 372). Carnivores (and omnivores) feed on other consumers.
Release of energy in both 
autotrophs and heterotrophs
Autotrophs have stores of chemical energy in the form of glucose, whereas heterotrophs need to 
consume other organisms to acquire stored chemical energy. What autotrophs and heterotrophs do 
have in common, however, is the ability to release this stored chemical energy to produce ATP in 
order to carry out life processes. The release of energy in both autotrophs and heterotrophs is from 
the oxidation of carbon compounds in cell respiration. Autotrophs are the base of all food chains, 
in that they provide the energy to maintain ecosystems, and heterotrophs pass on this energy from 
one trophic level to the next. All energy is ultimately released from food chains as heat, through the 
breakdown of organic molecules via respiration (see page 405).
Common mistake
People often think that only animals respire. All organisms respire, including plants, bacteria, fungi 
and protists. Respiration provides all organisms with energy for growth, synthesis of biological 
molecules, and other living processes.
Link
Photoautotrophs 
are also covered 
in Chapter B4.2, 
page 366. Redox 
reactions are covered 
in Chapter C1.2, 
page 412. 
4	 Compare 
and contrast 
photoautotrophs 
and 
chemoautotrophs.
Link
Heterotrophs are also 
discussed and defined 
in Chapter B4.2, 
page 366.
Top tip!
A heterotroph is an 
organism that obtains 
organic molecules 
from other organisms. 
A consumer is 
an organism that 
ingests other organic 
matter that is living 
or recently killed. 
Saprotrophs are 
heterotrophs that do 
not ‘ingest’ organic 
matter but secrete 
enzymes for external 
digestion.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
586
Classification of organisms into trophic levels
Food chains are formed from different trophic (or feeding) levels. Producers are at the bottom of food 
chains, the first trophic level. Herbivores, which consume producers, are called primary consumers.
Animals that feed exclusively on other animals are carnivores. Carnivores that feed on primary 
consumers are known as secondary consumers, and carnivores that feed on secondary consumers 
are called tertiary consumers, and so on.
The trophic levels of organisms in food chains and food webs from different ecosystems are classified 
in Table C4.2.1.
 
■Table C4.2.1 A summary of trophic levels in different ecosystems
Trophic level
Woodland
Rainforest
Savannah
producer
oak
vines and creepers on rainforest trees
grass
primary or first consumer
caterpillar
silver-striped hawk-moth
wildebeest
secondary consumer
beetle
praying mantis
lion
tertiary consumer
shrew
chameleon lizard
quaternary consumer
fox
hook-billed vanga-shrike
Sometimes it can be difficult to decide at which trophic level to place an organism. For example, 
in the marine food chain of Figure C4.2.4, page 582, the seal feeds on grey mullet (a primary 
consumer), pollack (a secondary consumer) and lobster (a tertiary consumer), making the seal itself a 
secondary, tertiary or quaternary consumer depending on which food chain is referred to.
5	 Define the term trophic level.
6	 Suggest what trophic levels humans occupy. Give examples of different food chains 
that humans can be in.
7	 Refer back to Figure C4.2.4 on page 582, showing a marine food web. 
a	 State the trophic level of each species.
b	 Identify organisms that occupy more than one trophic level.
Top tip!
Many organisms 
have a varied diet 
and therefore occupy 
different trophic levels 
in different food chains.
Construction of energy pyramids
Feeding relationships of a food chain may be structured like a pyramid. At the start of the chain is a 
very large amount of energy in green plants. This supports a smaller quantity of energy in primary 
consumers, which, in turn, supports an even smaller quantity of energy in secondary consumers. 
A generalized ecosystem pyramid diagram, representing the structure of an ecosystem in terms of 
the energy content of the organisms at each trophic level, is shown in Figure C4.2.8. Percentages 
represent the relative quantities of energy available at each trophic level.
Link
Food chains are 
covered earlier in this 
chapter on page 580.
	
◆Primary consumer: 
second trophic level of 
a food chain; organisms 
that consume/feed on 
producers.
	
◆Secondary 
consumer: third trophic 
level of a food chain; an 
animal (carnivore) that 
feeds on plant-eating 
animals (herbivores) in a 
food chain.
	
◆Tertiary consumer: 
fourth trophic level of 
a food chain; an animal 
that feeds on secondary 
consumers in a food chain.
Top tip!
An energy pyramid is a 
graphical representation 
showing the flow of 
energy at each trophic 
level in an ecosystem.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
587
producers
primary consumers
secondary consumers
tertiary consumers
100%
10%
1%
0.1%
Only energy taken in at one trophic level and then built in as 
chemical energy in the molecules making up the cells and 
tissues is available to the next trophic level. This is about 
10% of the energy.
The reasons are as follows:
• Much energy is used for cell respiration to provide energy 
for growth, movement, feeding and all other essential 
life processes.
• Not all food eaten can be digested. Some passes out with 
the faeces. Indigestible matter includes bones, hair, 
feathers and ligniﬁed ﬁbres in plants.
• Not all organisms at each trophic level are eaten. Some 
escape predation.
 
■Figure C4.2.8 A generalized pyramid of energy
Nature of science: Models
Pyramids are graphical models. They show quantitative 
differences between the trophic levels in an ecosystem. 
Pyramids of energy model the energy flow through ecosystems 
and represent the flow of energy through trophic levels. As 
energy is lost at each trophic level and gradually diminishes 
throughout the food chain, these diagrams are always pyramid 
shaped (unlike pyramids of numbers, which plot the number 
of organisms at each trophic level, and pyramids of biomass, 
which plot the total biomass at each trophic level). 
Pyramids of energy represent the productivity of each trophic 
level, that is to say, how much new biomass is being made 
(and therefore energy stored) in a particular period of time in a 
specific area. They are therefore measured in units of flow (e.g. 
kg m−2 yr−1 or kJ m−2 yr−1). The advantages of using pyramids of 
energy to represent ecosystems as graphical models, compared 
to other methods, can be summarized as follows: 
l	 Pyramids of numbers and biomass show the storage in the 
food chain at a given point in time (they are a ‘snapshot’ 
of the ecosystem), whereas pyramids of energy show the 
rate at which those stores are being generated.
l	 Pyramids of energy take into account seasonal fluctuations, 
as data are recorded over a period of time, rather than at 
one point in time. Pyramids of numbers and biomass can, 
therefore, be inverted (whereby the producer trophic level 
is narrower than the primary consumer trophic level), if 
the amount and/or biomass of the producers is lower than 
that of the next trophic level at the time when the samples 
were recorded. For example, grass in a field may have a 
lower biomass than the herbivores that feed on it because 
the herbivores have been eating the grass over time. This 
results in an inverted pyramid of biomass; over time, as the 
grass grows and gets longer, the productivity of the grass 
will be higher than the productivity of the herbivores that 
feed on it. Because productivity, recorded over a period of 
time, is always higher in producers than subsequent trophic 
levels, pyramids of energy are never inverted.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Exploring
You need to be able to use research data from specific ecosystems to represent energy 
transfer and energy losses between trophic levels in food chains.
Research data from a specific ecosystem in your country or region. Make sure you 
consult a variety of sources and select the relevant information. How is the energy in 
the ecosystem measured? How could this be used to represent energy transfer and 
energy losses between trophic levels in food chains? 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
588
Tool 3: Mathematics
Representing energy flow in the form of pyramids of energy
On page 586, the use of pyramids of energy as graphical models of energy flow 
through an ecosystem was discussed. 
Pyramids of energy are created by plotting each horizontal bar (representing each 
trophic level) with the same height and different lengths to represent the different 
energy content. The vertical axis is centred on the horizontal axis, with data distributed 
equally to each side of the axis, creating a pyramid.
Pyramids of energy can be drawn for different biomes (see Figure C4.2.9). Biomes vary 
in their capacity to accumulate biomass, as noted above. Biomass accumulates when 
autotrophs and heterotrophs grow or reproduce. Trophic levels can be constructed by 
using the ‘10% rule’ of energy conversion (that is, usually around 10% of energy is 
passed on from one trophic level to the next).
tundra
scale = 100 g m–2yr–1
temperate grassland
tropical rainforest
temperate forest
 
■Figure C4.2.9 Pyramids of energy for different biomes
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Processing data; interpreting results
Construct a pyramid of energy for an ecosystem in your country. Use the primary 
production data (measured in grams of carbon per m2 per year) you collected in 
Inquiry 1 on page 587 to plot the pyramid, using the instructions in the Tool 3 above. 
How many trophic levels does your pyramid of energy have? Why is this? How does 
your graph compare to those in Figure C4.2.9?
Common mistake
Diagrams of pyramids of energy often show inaccurate proportions for the different trophic levels. 
The width of each level should be 10% of the one below it (see Figure C4.2.9).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
589
Reductions in energy availability in food chains 
Between each trophic level there is an energy transfer. At the base of the food chain, green plants (the 
producers) transfer light energy into the chemical energy of sugars in photosynthesis. However, much 
of the light energy reaching the green leaf is not retained in the green leaf. Some is reflected away, 
some transmitted, and some lost as heat energy. Meanwhile, sugars are converted into lipids, amino 
acids and other metabolites within the cells and tissues of the plant. Some of these metabolites are 
used in the growth and development of the plant and, through these reactions, energy is stored in 
the organic molecules of the plant body. 
The reactions of respiration and of the rest of the plant’s metabolism produce heat energy, so some 
energy is lost from the plant through these reactions. Chemical energy is transferred every time the 
tissues of a green plant are eaten by herbivores. Finally, on the death of the plant, the remaining 
energy passes to detritivores and saprotrophs when dead plant matter is broken down and decayed. 
The diverse routes of energy flow through a primary producer are summarized in Figure C4.2.10.
Sun
1 energy input as chemical
energy in organic molecules
of tissues of prey, caught
and eaten by the consumer
2 energy used to drive
   life processes 
5 energy transferred to
consumer at higher trophic level
if caught and tissues eaten
6 ﬁnal energy lost to detritivores
and saprotrophs, on death and
decay of animal
1 LIGHT
   ENERGY input 
   
4 heat energy lost
   as waste product of chemical
   reactions of cell respiration
   and metabolism   
5 energy transferred
   to primary consumers
   (herbivores) when plant
   tissues are eaten 
6 ﬁnal energy lost
   to detritivores and
   saprotrophs, on
   death and decay
   of dead plant on
   or in the soil
energy transferred to
sugar etc. produced
by photosynthesis  
3 energy stored
   in organic molecules
   of new cells and tissues  
2 energy
   used
   to drive life
   processes
energy ﬂow through a producer
energy ﬂow through a consumer
3 energy stored in organic 
molecules of tissues
4 energy lost
   as heat, waste product of
   chemical reactions of cell
   respiration and metabolism
   and as undigested food and
   excreted matter
 
■Figure C4.2.10 Energy flow through producers and consumers


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
590
The reduction in energy availability at each successive stage in food chains is due to large energy 
losses between trophic levels. Producers are eaten by primary consumers, or herbivores. In this 
way, energy is transferred to the consumer. The consumer, in turn, transfers energy in the muscular 
movements by which it hunts and feeds, and as it seeks to escape from predators. Some of the food 
it has eaten remains undigested, passing through the consumer unchanged, and is lost as waste 
products in faeces and as urea. Heat energy, a waste product of the reactions of respiration and of 
the animal’s metabolism, is continuously lost as the consumer grows, develops and forms body 
tissues. If the consumer is itself caught and consumed by another, larger consumer, energy is again 
transferred. Finally, on the death of the consumer, the remaining energy passes to detritivores and 
saprotrophs when dead matter is broken down and decayed. Ultimately, the energy in matter that 
is decayed is lost as heat. Only a relatively small proportion of this energy is passed on to the next 
trophic level (see Figure C4.2.11). Around 90% of energy is lost between trophic levels due to:
l	 biomass not being ingested (eaten)
l	 food not being digested (and then absorbed into consumers for assimilation)
l	 excretion
l	 loss as heat from respiration
l	 loss as inedible parts, such as bones, teeth and fur.
primary consumer
(caterpillar)
Imagine 100 units of energy
being eaten. Only 10 units
get to be tissues; the rest is
lost in respiration and as
waste products.
eaten
eaten
(100)
gas, faeces
and waste (60)
respiration (30)
tissue (10)
secondary consumer
(shrew)
 
■Figure C4.2.11 Loss of energy between trophic levels
The percentage of ingested energy converted to biomass is dependent on the respiration rate. 
Animals with greater respiration rates will, on average, pass on less energy than ones with a lower 
metabolic rate, although much also depends on the diet of the animal (herbivores are less efficient at 
digesting plant material, with more faecal matter produced, than carnivores are at digesting meat). 
Ectothermic (cold-blooded) animals, such as snakes and reptiles, lose less heat from respiration than 
endothermic animals, such as mammals, that maintain their body temperatures at constant levels.
Decomposers and detritus feeders are not usually considered to be part of food chains. However, 
these organisms play a role in energy transformations in food chains. Biomass that is not eaten by 
consumers is recycled by decomposers and detritivores, and they ultimately return the energy to the 
environment as heat via respiration. 
 
■Heat loss in ecosystems
Heat loss to the environment in both autotrophs and heterotrophs is due to conversion of chemical 
energy to heat in cell respiration (Figure C4.2.12). Cell respiration and metabolism produce heat as a 
waste product.
8	 List the factors 
that lead to energy 
loss from food 
chains.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
591
A linear food chain – energy flow
LIGHT
ENERGY
green
plant –
producer
primary
consumer
secondary
consumer
detritivores
and
saprotrophs
photosynthesis
feeding
feeding
respiration
heat energy lost to space
death, waste matter and faeces
respiration
Living organisms cannot convert
heat to other forms of energy.
Heat is lost from ecosystems.
 
■Figure C4.2.12 Heat is lost from food chains
The transfer of energy in food chains is inefficient. The first law of thermodynamics states that energy 
cannot be created or destroyed. The total amount of energy in an isolated system does not change, 
although this energy is gradually dissipated from useable energy (such as ATP) to less useful, simpler 
forms (such as heat) as work is done. That is the second law of thermodynamics. 
 
■Restrictions on the number of trophic levels
Only about 10% of what is eaten by a consumer is built into that organism’s body, and so is 
potentially available to be transferred on through predation or grazing on plants. There are two 
consequences of this:
l	 At each successive stage in food chains there are fewer organisms or smaller organisms. (Note: 
there is therefore less biomass, but the energy content per unit mass is not reduced.) 
l	 The number of trophic levels in ecosystems is therefore restricted due to energy losses. 
Energy is lost from the food chain as heat during respiration, due to incomplete digestion, and 
through excretion of the waste products of metabolism. Therefore, energy decreases through a food 
chain, with a general rule of 10% of the energy being passed on to the next level. The energy loss at 
transfer between trophic levels means that food chains are short. Few transfers can be sustained 
when so little of what is eaten by one consumer is potentially available to those organisms in the next 
step in the food chain. Consequently, it is very uncommon for food chains to have more than four or 
five links between producer (green plant) and top carnivore. Food chains that contain species that 
expend a lot of energy, such a warm-blooded predator that loses energy through maintaining body 
temperature and in hunting prey, will be shorter than food chains that contain organisms that 
expend less energy, such as a spider, which is both cold-blooded and catches its prey using a web, 
and so loses less energy through movement and loss of body heat.
 
■Food chains and world hunger
Today, the number of humans in the world population is huge. The human population is predicted 
to reach 8 billion on 15 November 2022 and the United Nations estimates it will reach 9.7 billion 
in 2050. This frequently places excessive demands on the food supply and on the resources that are 
used in its production – so much so that, around the world, there are local populations of people 
with too little to eat. World hunger is a major problem of which we can’t fail to be aware.
Top tip!
Energy transfers are 
not 100% efficient, so 
heat is produced both 
when ATP is produced 
in cell respiration and 
when it is used in cells.
9	 Explain why, in a 
food chain, a large 
amount of plant 
material supports 
a smaller mass of 
herbivores and an 
even smaller mass 
of carnivores.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
592
There is a potential ethical challenge for well-nourished people living alongside other humans who 
may be starving and who may die prematurely due to malnourishment. In the light of this, some 
humans opt for a vegetarian diet. Vegetarians do not eat meat and most do not eat fish, but the 
majority consume animal products such as milk, cheese and eggs.
The rationale for this type of vegetarianism is that, when we eat meat rather than food of plant origin, 
we extend food chains by a least one trophic level. In effect, vegetarians observe that we waste 
energy by choosing to eat animal products rather than matter of plant origin, thereby leaving less 
food for others. This is an important issue when considering eating animal products.
Primary production 
Primary production is the accumulation of carbon compounds in biomass by autotrophs. Units are 
mass (of carbon) per unit area per unit time (usually g m−2 yr−1). 
l	 The amount of glucose produced by the plant in a specific area in a specific period of time is 
known as gross primary productivity (GPP). This equates to the rate of photosynthesis. Much 
of this energy is used in respiration and ultimately lost as heat from the producers. 
l	 The remaining energy, taking into account losses through respiration, is stored in new biomass: 
this is known as net primary productivity (NPP). 
NPP can be calculated as follows:
NPP = GPP − R
where R = respiratory loss.
Sun
some glucose used to
supply energy to drive
cellular processes (respiration)
remaining glucose available
to be laid down as new
material – biomass
(net primary production)
glucose produced
during photosynthesis
(gross primary production)
 
■Figure C4.2.13 Primary production
NPP is the rate at which plants accumulate new biomass. It represents the actual store of energy 
contained in potential food for consumers. NPP is easier to calculate than GPP as biomass is simpler 
to measure than the amount of energy fixed into glucose.
NPP values vary greatly for different biomes. NPP is affected by factors that influence the rate of 
photosynthesis: the amount of insolation (sunlight), the amount of rainfall (precipitation) and 
the temperature. Warmer temperatures speed up enzyme reactions that drive photosynthesis, 
although temperatures that are too hot can lead to denaturation. Rainforests have the highest NPP 
because of year-round insolation, warm temperatures and high levels of precipitation. The high 
NPP means that rainforest has a complex structure, with layers from ground level to canopy.  
TOK
Do you think that 
learning about the loss 
of energy between 
trophic levels, along 
with your knowledge 
about climate change 
and world hunger, 
necessarily raises ethical 
issues surrounding 
people’s eating habits? 
Why or why not?
	
◆Primary production: 
the accumulation of 
carbon compounds in 
biomass by autotrophs; 
accumulation of biomass 
occurs when autotrophs 
grow and reproduce.
	
◆Gross primary 
productivity (GPP): the 
total gain in biomass per 
unit area per unit time 
fixed by producers. (The 
units are g per unit time.)
	
◆Net primary 
productivity (NPP): 
the gain by producers 
in biomass per unit 
area per unit time 
remaining after allowing 
for respiratory losses 
(R). This is potentially 
available to consumers in 
an ecosystem.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
593
As so much energy is stored at the producer level, rainforests can support a number of trophic levels, 
as at the tertiary (and even at the quaternary) consumer level there is sufficient energy to support a 
wide diversity of animals. 
Temperate ecosystems vary from deciduous and evergreen forests to grasslands. Rainfall, temperature 
and sunlight are seasonal, which reduces overall NPP compared to tropical rainforests. Lower levels 
of NPP mean less stored chemical energy at the producer level and, therefore, less biomass at each 
trophic level, potentially leading to shorter food chains. 
In the colder ecosystems found in the Northern Hemisphere, such as tundra, there are slower 
nutrient cycles, a lack of soil fauna and acidic leaf litter. Tree and shrub growth can be stunted. 
Evergreen species maximize productivity as photosynthesis can take place as soon as spring sunlight 
becomes available. The low productivity of tundra means that large areas are needed to support 
grazing animals such as reindeer, and these animals need to migrate long distances to support their 
herds. In highly stressful environments, with very low temperatures or rainfall, only mosses and 
lichens may be able to survive. Lower productivity in such ecosystems and the harsher conditions 
means that food chains are usually shorter, with limited energy available in biomass to support 
possibly only the primary consumer trophic level.
Secondary production
Secondary production is the accumulation of carbon compounds in biomass by heterotrophs. 
Secondary production may also be categorized according to gross (total) and net (usable) amounts 
of biomass.
Much of the biomass eaten by consumers is absorbed (e.g. through the guts of animals) and 
converted into new biomass within cells – this is gross secondary productivity (GSP).
l	 Consumers do not use all the biomass they eat.
l	 Some energy passes out in faeces and excretion.
l	 Only the biomass remaining can be used by the consumer (GSP),  
where GSP = food eaten − faecal loss
energy assimilated
energy in faeces
energy taken in
(food eaten)
 
■Figure C4.2.14 Animals do not use all the biomass they consume. 
Some of it passes out in faeces and excretion (GSP)
Some of the biomass absorbed by animals is used in respiration:
l	 The energy released is used to support life processes.
l	 The remaining energy is available to form new biomass: net secondary productivity (NSP)
l	 So, NSP = GSP − R (where R = respiratory loss).
	
◆Secondary 
production: the 
accumulation of carbon 
compounds in biomass 
by heterotrophs; 
accumulation of biomass 
occurs when heterotrophs 
grow and reproduce
	
◆Gross secondary 
productivity (GSP): the 
total gain by consumers 
in energy or biomass per 
unit area per unit time 
through absorption.
	
◆Net secondary 
productivity (NSP): 
the gain by consumers 
in energy or biomass per 
unit area per unit time 
remaining after allowing 
for respiratory losses (R).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
594
energy used for respiration
new biomass
energy in faeces
energy taken in
(food eaten)
 
■Figure C4.2.15 Some of the energy assimilated by animals is used in respiration, to 
support life processes, and the remainder is available to form new biomass (NSP)
It is this new biomass (NSP) that is then available to the next trophic level.
Due to loss of biomass when carbon compounds are converted to carbon dioxide and water in cell 
respiration, secondary production is lower than primary production in an ecosystem. 
10	Distinguish between primary production and secondary production.
The carbon cycle
 
■Constructing carbon cycle diagrams
The nutrients in an ecosystem are recycled and reused. All the chemical elements of nutrients 
circulate between living things and the environment. The process of exchange or ‘flux’ (back and 
forth movements) of materials is a continuous one. These movements take more or less circular paths 
and have a biological component and a geochemical component. Consequently, these movements are 
known as biogeochemical cycles.
Photosynthesis converts atmospheric carbon, in the form of carbon dioxide, into carbon stored in 
biomass, initially in the form of glucose and then other organic compounds. Feeding, initially by 
herbivores and omnivores on producers, and then by carnivores consuming other organisms, passes 
carbon along food chains. Carbon is returned to the atmosphere by respiration, where glucose and 
other organic compounds are broken down to release ATP, producing carbon dioxide as a waste 
product. Respiration is carried out by all organisms in a food chain – producers and consumers – as 
well as decomposers, which feed on the organic molecules from dead organisms and waste products.
We are going to examine the carbon cycle in more detail (Figure C4.2.16). 
11	Look at Figure C4.2.16. State an example of when the element carbon is an abiotic 
component and when it is a biotic component. 
Top tip!
Make sure you can 
illustrate with a 
diagram how carbon is 
recycled in ecosystems 
by photosynthesis, 
feeding and respiration.
	
◆Carbon cycle: the 
series of processes by 
which carbon compounds 
are cycled between 
the abiotic and biotic 
environments, involving 
photosynthesis, feeding, 
decomposition and 
respiration.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
595
CO2 in atmosphere
CO2 
CO2 
CO2 
respiration
phyto-
plankton
aquatic
plants
photosynthesis
death
death
eaten
aquatic animals
HCO3
– 
H2CO3
respiration
respiration
photosynthesis
combustion
volcano
eruptions
animals
industry and 
transport
feeding
death, 
faeces 
and urea
dead organic matter
→ humus in soil
dead 
organic 
matter
released from
sediments
decay by detritivores
and decomposers
(saprotrophic
micro-organisms)
industrial lime
production
subduction of
sedimentary
rocks into mantle
chalk quarrying
terrestrial chalk
and limestone
fossil fuels
(coal, oil, gas)
sedimentation of
skeletons and
shells → chalk and
limestone
exceptional geological
conditions 
anaerobic conditions
green
plants
CO2 
CO2 
CO2 
 
■Figure C4.2.16 The carbon cycle
In diagrams of the carbon cycle, the stores of carbon, such as carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, can 
be represented as boxes, and the fluxes, such as photosynthesis, as arrows between the boxes. 
Arrows have arrow heads to show direction. The forms in which carbon exists are stated, for example 
carbon compounds in plants, together with the processes that convert carbon from one form to 
another. Figure C4.2.16 includes all the main biological processes in the cycling of carbon.
Common mistake
The carbon cycle should be drawn using boxes and arrows. It is not necessary to draw organisms in 
the carbon cycle using pictures, or a factory smokestack to represent the combustion of fossil fuels, 
for example. Storages (also called reservoirs) should be represented as boxes, named and the linking 
arrows (fluxes) labelled with the processes labelled. 
Make sure that carbon dioxide is added to the diagram of the carbon cycle. This is the ultimate 
source of all carbon in living things, so it is essential that it is included.
 
■Ecosystems as carbon sinks and carbon sources
The carbon cycle illustrates the fact that biogeochemical cycles have sources and sinks. 
l	 A carbon sink is anything that absorbs more carbon from the atmosphere than it releases – for 
example, plants, the ocean and soil. These are reservoirs that retain carbon and keep it from 
entering Earth’s atmosphere. Forests are typically carbon sinks, as well as oceans. When plants 
produce new biomass through photosynthesis, carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere. 
Deforestation is a source of carbon emission into the atmosphere, but forest regrowth is a form of 
carbon sequestration, with the forests themselves serving as carbon sinks.
12	Use the 
representation of 
the carbon cycle 
in Figure C4.2.16 
to construct a 
specific carbon 
cycle for the 
terrestrial ecosystem 
in which you live. 
Include the roles 
of photosynthesis, 
feeding and 
respiration.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
596
l	 A carbon source is anything that releases more carbon into the atmosphere than it absorbs – for 
example, the burning of fossil fuels.
The processes by which carbon moves between these sinks, and between living things and the 
environment, are summarized in Table C4.2.2. Read through the table and locate each process in the 
carbon cycle.
 
■Table C4.2.2 How carbon is circulated between living organisms and the environment 
Diffusion 
Carbon dioxide diffuses from the atmosphere or water into autotrophs.
Photosynthesis in terrestrial 
and aquatic plants
Autotrophs convert carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into 
carbohydrates and other organic compounds. Aquatic plants use dissolved 
carbon dioxide and hydrogencarbonate ions (HCO3
−) from the water in the 
same way.
Respiration in all living things
Carbon dioxide is produced as a waste product and diffuses out into the 
atmosphere or water.
Decay by saprotrophic 
micro‑organisms
Dead organic matter is decomposed to carbon dioxide, water, ammonia 
and mineral ions by micro‑organisms. The carbon dioxide produced 
diffuses out into the atmosphere or water (as HCO3
− ions).
Peat formation
In acidic and anaerobic conditions, dead organic matter is not fully 
decomposed but accumulates as peat. Peat decays slowly when exposed 
to oxygen, releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Peat in past geological areas was converted to coal, oil or natural gas 
(mainly methane) and these fossil fuels accumulated. They are now 
progressively exploited.
Methane formation from 
organic matter under anaerobic 
conditions
Organic matter held under anaerobic conditions (such as in waterlogged 
soil or in the mud of deep ponds) is decayed by methane-producing 
bacteria. Methane accumulates in the ground in porous rocks or under 
water, but may progressively escape into the atmosphere. In air and UV 
light, methane is slowly oxidized to carbon dioxide and water.
Combustion of fossil fuels
Releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Since the start of the 
Industrial Revolution in Europe, carbon dioxide has been released at an 
increasing rate.
Shell and bone formation by 
organisms
Many organisms combine HCO3
− with calcium ions and other minerals to 
form carbonate shells and bones. These may accumulate as sediments and 
come to form sedimentary rocks (chalk and limestone) in geological time. 
Reef-building corals are particular examples of this.
Lime formation for agriculture 
and building materials
Terrestrial chalk and limestone are quarried and converted to lime in kilns. 
Carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere in the process. 
Volcanic eruptions
On a geological timescale, sedimentary rocks (including chalk and 
limestone) become subducted into the Earth’s mantle. When volcanoes 
erupt, molten rocks and carbon dioxide are released into the atmosphere. 
Top tip!
If photosynthesis exceeds respiration, there is a net uptake of carbon dioxide; if respiration exceeds 
photosynthesis, there is a net release of carbon dioxide.
Carbon fluxes
The size of the sources and sinks, and the fluxes of carbon between them, is summarized in 
Figure C4.2.17. Examine these data carefully. The data on directions of flux will help confirm your 
identification of the sources and sinks of carbon. 
13	Identify sources 
and sinks in the 
diagram of the 
carbon cycle 
(Figure C4.2.16).
14	Draw a simplified 
diagram of the 
carbon cycle, 
including the roles 
of animals, plants 
and decomposers.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
597
atmosphere
Red arrows are ﬂows that are related to human activities
Green T = ﬂows that are sensitive to temperature
1580 GT
mantle
 
           deep oceans
38000 GT
sedimentary rocks
  ocean biota
3 GT
                               surface oceans
970 GT
photosynthesis
110
respiration 50
respiration 59.4
farming
runoff 0.6
90
90
10
10
fossil
fuel
burning
6
ocean–
atmosphere
diffusion
96.2
105.6
upwelling &
downwelling
litter fall
60
burning
sedimentation 0.6
subduction
0.6
volcanic
eruptions
0.6
The global carbon cycle showing the size of the carbon reservoirs (in gigatonnes [GT])
and the exchange between reservoirs (GT/year). Figures are estimates.
750 GT
soil
610 GT
land biota
1 000 000 GT
units are gigatonnes
of carbon – one
gigatonne = one billion
metric tonnes = 1015 g
numbers next to
ﬂows are the
approximate annual
ﬂows in GT/year
The global carbon cycle
T
T T
T
T
 
■Figure C4.2.17 Carbon fluxes due to processes in the carbon cycle
15	Outline the difference in the rates of ‘flux’ between the atmosphere and land biota, 
and between the deep ocean and sedimentary rocks.
 
■Release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere during 
combustion
Biomass, peat, coal, oil and natural gas are carbon sinks. Carbon sinks vary in when they were 
formed. All these sinks can undergo combustion to release carbon dioxide. Combustion following 
lightning strikes sometimes happens naturally, but human activities have greatly increased 
combustion rates.
Peat
Peat is formed over millions of years by plant matter that is not fully decomposed (Table C4.2.2). 
Large areas of wetland, such as the East Anglian fens in the UK, have been drained for farming, 
which has degraded the peat. No longer waterlogged, the peat has been eroded by the wind, which 
has increased the flux of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Drier conditions make it more likely 
for peat to catch fire. Climate-related drying is increasing the emissions of carbon from peat, while 
increased average temperatures, reduced rainfall and altered soil hydrology increase the risk of 
peat fires.
Burning of fossil fuels
Most carbon dioxide emissions come from burning fossil fuels. The discovery of coal and other 
fossil fuels as a source of energy enabled the widespread use of machinery in the nineteenth century 
to power industrial revolutions. Energy – along with carbon – trapped by plants millions of years 
ago can be released. Since the start of the Industrial Revolution in Europe, in the early part of the 
nineteenth century, carbon dioxide has been released at an increasing rate (Table C4.2.3), attributed 
to the burning of coal and oil. Fossil fuels are so-called because they are the remains of biological 
life, mostly laid down in the Carboniferous period. As a result, we are now adding to our atmosphere 
carbon that had been locked away for about 350 million years. This is an entirely new development 
in geological history.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
598
 
■Table C4.2.3 Changing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide recorded and predicted
CO2/parts per million
pre-Industrial Revolution level
280 (±10)
by mid-1970s 
330
by 1990 
360
by 2007 
380
by 2013 
400
by 2018 
409
by 2050 (if current rate is maintained) 
500
Energy security is a key goal for countries, with most relying on fossil fuels. Energy security depends 
on an adequate, reliable and affordable supply of energy that provides a degree of independence. The 
most accessible, and lowest-cost, deposits of fossil fuels are invariably developed first. Large oil, coal 
and gas reserves in certain countries have led to fossil fuel exploitation in those countries. Carbon-
emitting energy resources are currently at the core of the global economy, with countries largely 
dependent on fossil fuels to drive economic development. 
As well as modifying the carbon cycle, fossil fuel combustion has altered the way in which energy 
from the Sun interacts with the atmosphere and the surface of our planet. The concentration of 
atmospheric carbon, and associated positive feedback mechanisms, leads to global warming. Global 
warming and devastating natural disasters such as Hurricane Katrina have increased the awareness 
about the misuse of energy resources, leading to movement away from fossil fuel resources.
Fires in the Amazon
Parts of the Amazonia region of South America experience a dry season (any month with less than 
100 mm of rain) from July to September. However, even the Amazon forest’s drought tolerance 
has its limits. Land-use activities increase forest susceptibility to fire during periods of drought by 
providing ignition sources, by fragmenting the forest and by thinning the forest through logging. 
Forests are burned in preparation for crops or pasture and to improve pasture forage. However, 
these fires frequently burn beyond their intended boundaries into neighbouring forests. During 
the severe drought of 1998, approximately 39 000 km2 of standing forest caught fire, which is twice 
the area that was clear-cut that year. In 2016, the number of fires increased by 36% compared with 
the preceding 12 years. The dry season is also lasting longer, thus increasing the risk of fires. These 
low, slow-moving fires can kill up to 50% of trees above 10 cm in diameter. Forest fires can increase 
susceptibility to further burning in a positive feedback mechanism as they kill trees, thus opening 
the canopy and enabling increased solar radiation to reach the forest floor.
One projection for 2030 suggests that 31% of the Amazon closed-canopy forest formation will be 
deforested, and 24% will be damaged by drought or logging. If ‘business as usual’ continues, logging 
will further reduce the Amazonian forest carbon store size by 15%; drought damage will cause 
another 10% reduction in forest biomass. The effects of more frequent fires could be to release an 
additional 20% of forest carbon to the atmosphere.
Link
Global warming and 
positive feedback 
mechanisms are 
discussed in Chapter 
D4.3, page 825.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
599
Analysis of the Keeling curve in terms of 
photosynthesis, respiration and combustion
Nature of science: Measurements
The concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide has become of critical concern today, with the 
climate warming year on year. It is therefore important to obtain reliable data on the concentration 
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Accurate measuring devices were established at the Mauna 
Loa Observatory, Hawaii, in 1957 to monitor the global environment. Measurements of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide concentrations had begun with work by Dr Charles David Keeling, so the graph 
plotted from carbon dioxide data is known as the Keeling curve. Dr Keeling measured carbon 
dioxide concentrations representative of the ‘free atmosphere’: concentrations that prevail over a 
large part of the Northern Hemisphere. Measurement of carbon dioxide is now the responsibility of 
two scientific institutions: the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. Monthly data are posted.
Link
Climate change 
and its impacts are 
covered in Chapter 
D4.3, page 820. 
	
◆Keeling curve: a 
daily record of global 
atmospheric carbon 
dioxide concentration 
kept since the 1950s.
In early work at Mauna Loa, Keeling noticed that the carbon dioxide concentration rose by 1 part per 
million (ppm) in April 1958 to a maximum in May before declining and reaching a minimum in 
October 1958. After this, the concentration increased again and repeated the same seasonal pattern 
in 1959. Keeling said: ‘We were witnessing for the first time nature’s withdrawing carbon dioxide 
from the air for plant growth during summer and returning it each succeeding winter.’
The most recent data for carbon dioxide levels available from the ongoing investigation are shown in 
Figure C4.2.18. Notice the annual rhythm shown in the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration 
(lower in the summer months and higher in the winter months).
atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentration/parts per million
year
380
360
340
320
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
400
420
 
■Figure C4.2.18 Atmospheric carbon dioxide measured at the Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii
16	Mauna Loa is a 
volcano on the 
Island of Hawaii 
in the US State 
of Hawaii in the 
Pacific Ocean. It 
may seem unusual 
that such a tiny 
island provides 
such key data for 
scientists. Suggest 
why Mauna Loa 
is used as the site 
for monitoring 
atmospheric 
carbon dioxide 
concentrations.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme C: Interaction and interdependence – Ecosystems
600
Notice the annual rhythm (Figure C4.2.18 and Figure C4.2.19), first noticed by Dr Keeling, shown 
in the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration (in parts per million): lower in the summer months 
and higher in the winter months. This is due to photosynthesis that occurs on land in the Northern 
Hemisphere, which impacts on the composition of the global atmosphere. 
 
■Figure C4.2.19 A record of carbon dioxide daily and weekly means at Mauna Loa, 2021–22; 
note that the x-axis shows data recorded for more than one year 
In June 2022, carbon dioxide was present in the atmosphere at a concentration that varied between 
413 and 422 ppm (Figure C4.2.19). We might expect the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide to be 
maintained by a balance between the fixation of this gas during photosynthesis and release of carbon 
dioxide into the atmosphere by respiration, combustion and decay by micro-organisms – an 
interrelationship illustrated in the carbon cycle (Figure C4.2.16). In fact, photosynthesis does 
withdraw almost as much carbon dioxide during daylight hours as is released into the air by all the 
other processes, day and night – but not quite as much. Overall, outputs of carbon dioxide from 
respiration and combustion are higher than inputs into producers through photosynthesis. As a result, 
the level of atmospheric carbon dioxide continues to rise (Figure C4.2.18).
TOK
In Theory of Knowledge, you might consider the impact of knowledge from one Area of 
Knowledge on another. Here, the relationship is between biological knowledge on climate 
change and political knowledge on how to manage the limited resources of a country or between 
countries. Whether and how to regulate a country’s use of fossil fuels will be decided in the context 
of a wide range of other knowledge, including economics and biology, and this information might 
not all point in the same direction. An economist might claim that using more fossil fuels will have 
certain types of important benefits, but a biologist might claim that using more fossil fuels will 
have important detrimental effects and that increasing the use of green technology to generate 
renewable sources of energy, such as solar power, is ultimately better for the economy in the long 
term and for the future of the planet. It is up to the political figures to weigh these facts in relation 
to one another when determining public or regulatory policy. You might argue that our politicians 
have an ethical obligation to understand the relevant facts from the competing areas of knowledge. 
Top tip!
There are both annual 
fluctuations and a 
long-term trend shown 
by the Keeling curve. 
Short-term (i.e. yearly) 
trends are due to 
changes in the levels 
of photosynthesis 
in the Northern 
Hemisphere. The 
overall upward trend 
is due to increasing 
combustion of fossil 
fuels, deforestation and 
other factors that lead 
to outputs of carbon 
dioxide being higher 
than inputs.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

C4.2   Transfers of energy and matter
601
	ATL C4.2C 
Access the latest updates of the Keeling curve here: https://scrippsco2.ucsd.edu 
The weekly average carbon dioxide concentration for the past year can be found here:  
https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/weekly.html
How has the carbon dioxide concentration changed since June 2022 to the present day? Print the 
Keeling curve and yearly pattern, and produce a poster that explains both annual fluctuations and 
the long-term trend.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide
Concept: Interdependence
There is dependence of aerobic respiration on atmospheric oxygen produced by 
photosynthesis, and of photosynthesis on atmospheric carbon dioxide produced 
by respiration.
The oxygen produced by autotrophs as the product of photosynthesis is used by organisms in 
aerobic respiration, and autotrophs use the carbon dioxide released by aerobic respiration in the 
process of photosynthesis. The fluxes between the release of carbon dioxide by all organisms 
through aerobic respiration and the intake of carbon dioxide through photosynthesis are very large 
(Figure C4.2.17). This is a major interaction between autotrophs and heterotrophs. 
Recycling of chemical elements
As we saw on page 583, ecosystems recycle chemical elements. All elements used by living 
organisms, not just carbon, are recycled (Figure C4.2.20). 
Nutrients provide the chemical elements that make up 
the molecules of cells and organisms. All organisms are 
made of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, together with 
mineral elements nitrogen, calcium, phosphorus, sulfur 
and potassium, and several others, in increasingly small 
amounts. Plants obtain their essential nutrients as 
carbon dioxide and water, from which they manufacture 
glucose. With the addition of mineral elements, 
absorbed as ions from the soil solution, they build up 
the complex organic molecules they require. Animals, 
on the other hand, obtain nutrients as complex organic 
molecules of food which they digest, absorb and 
assimilate into their own cells and tissues.
Decomposers play a key role in this recycling process (Figure C4.2.20) by breaking down detritus 
and other waste products into simple inorganic chemicals that are released into the environment. 
These inorganic molecules are absorbed by organisms and used to synthesize complex biological 
molecules such as proteins, fats, polysaccharides and DNA, before the cycle repeats itself.
Top tip!
You need to know 
about the carbon cycle 
but are not required to 
know details of other 
nutrient cycles, such as 
the nitrogen cycle.
absorption
feeding
and
digestion
death
decomposition
inorganic
molecule
or ion
organic
molecules in
consumers
organic
molecules
in producers
organic
molecules in
decomposers
 
■Figure C4.2.20 Nutrient cycles
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the 
direct and indirect 
consequences 
of rising carbon 
dioxide levels in the 
atmosphere?
2	 How does the 
transformation of 
energy from one 
form to another 
make biological 
processes possible? 
