D1.3   Mutation and gene editing
637
Mutation and gene editing
D1.3
•	 How do gene mutations occur?
•	 What are the consequences of gene mutation?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D1.3.1 	 Gene mutations as structural changes to genes at the molecular level
	 D1.3.2 	 Consequences of base substitutions
	 D1.3.3 	 Consequences of insertions and deletions
	 D1.3.4 	 Causes of gene mutation
	 D1.3.5 	 Randomness in mutation
	 D1.3.6	 Consequences of mutation in germ cells and somatic cells
	 D1.3.7 	 Mutation as a source of genetic variation
	 D1.3.8 	 Gene knockout as a technique for investigating the function of a gene by 
changing it to make it inoperative (HL only)
	 D1.3.9 	 Use of the CRISPR sequences and the enzyme Cas9 in gene editing (HL only)
	 D1.3.10 	Hypotheses to account for conserved or highly conserved sequences in genes 
(HL only)
Gene mutations as structural changes 
to genes at the molecular level
A gene mutation involves a change in the sequence of bases of a particular gene. Mutations are 
more likely to occur at certain times in the cell cycle than at other times. One such occasion is when 
the DNA molecule is replicating. We have noted that the enzyme DNA polymerase, which brings 
about the building of a complementary DNA strand, also ‘proofreads’ and corrects most errors 
(page 614). However, although proofreading is highly efficient, it does not correct all errors and gene 
mutations can and do occur spontaneously during the replication process.
Also, environmental factors or chemicals may cause changes to the DNA sequence of bases. 
These factors can include ionising radiation (page 640), UV light and various chemicals.
A point mutation is a change in one base in the gene sequence. It can be the result of:
l	 the change of one base to a different base (often caused by the DNA being copied incorrectly) – 
this is called a substitution mutation (Figure D1.2.8)
l	 the insertion of an additional base or bases into the DNA
l	 the deletion of a base or bases from the DNA.
A point mutation may change the amino acid in the protein encoded by the gene.
Because bases work in triplets (threes) to determine which amino acid is needed in a protein, an 
addition or deletion can have a profound effect. The deletion or insertion of a base results in what is 
called a frameshift. 
	
◆Gene mutation: 
change in the sequence 
of bases of a particular 
gene.
	
◆Substitution: a type 
of mutation in which one 
nucleotide is replaced by 
a different nucleotide.
	
◆Insertion: a type of 
mutation that involves 
the addition of one or 
more nucleotides into a 
segment of DNA.
	
◆Deletion: a type of 
mutation that involves 
the loss of one or more 
nucleotides from a 
segment of DNA.
	
◆Frameshift: a 
mutation in a DNA chain 
that occurs when the 
number of nucleotides 
inserted or deleted is not 
a multiple of three, so 
that every codon beyond 
the point of insertion or 
deletion is read incorrectly 
during translation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Molecules
638
Some changes result in a ‘nonsense’ mutation, so the changed genetic code cannot be read and has 
no meaning. If the change results in a different amino acid being coded for, then this mutation is 
called a ‘missense’ mutation.
Concept: Change
Mutations change the genetic code through insertion, deletion or substitution. 
As a result of mutations, polypeptides can cease to function, either through frameshift 
changes or through major insertions or deletions. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) are the result of base substitution mutations.
Consequences of base substitutions
Base substitutions can have an adverse effect. For example, sickle cell anaemia is caused by a change 
in the codon for the amino acid glutamic acid, resulting in the amino acid valine appearing instead 
(page 623).
However, because of the degeneracy of the genetic code (page 620), base substitutions may or may 
not always change an amino acid in a polypeptide. Each amino acid has several different codons and, 
if the base substituted matches one of these alternative codons for an amino acid, then there will be 
no effect on the proteome of the cell.
If the substitution occurs in a non-coding region of DNA, the mutation may have a neutral effect on 
the proteome of the cell. However, if the mutation is in a regulatory region that directs expression 
of a gene, a mutation may prevent the expression of the gene and so have a significant effect on 
the proteins found in a cell. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are also the result of base 
substitution mutations.
Consequences of insertions and deletions
Mutations by major insertions, deletions or resulting frameshifts increase the likelihood of 
polypeptides not functioning. Two examples are outlined below, one of an insertion and another of a 
deletion, which show the results of these mutations. 
 
■Insertion: effect on trinucleotide repeats of the HTT gene
Insertions can result in repeating base sequences of three nucleotides, expanding trinucleotide 
repeat sequences. These are known as trinucleotide repeat disorders. Trinucleotide repeat 
disorders are caused due to an abnormal number of triplet repeat sequences either in the coding or 
non-coding regions of the genome. Huntington’s disease is an example of this type of disorder.
Huntington’s disease is caused by an abnormality in the HTT gene. The HTT mutation that causes 
Huntington’s disease involves a DNA segment called a CAG trinucleotide repeat. This segment 
is made up of a series of three DNA bases (cytosine, adenine and guanine) that appear multiple 
times in a row. Normally, the CAG segment is repeated 10 to 35 times within the gene. Repeating 
segments can have a beneficial effect on brain development; more frequent repeats are associated 
with higher cognitive function. However, mutation leading to expansion of the trinucleotide repeats 
beyond 39 leads to Huntington’s disease – a neurodegenerative disorder (Figure D1.3.1). The disease 
takes the form of progressive mental deterioration, accompanied by involuntary muscle movements. 
1	 Define the term 
mutation.
2	 Outline how 
mutations can 
affect DNA.
Link
Single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) 
are also covered 
in Chapter A3.1, 
page 115.
Common 
mistake
Many people associate 
mutations with ‘bad’ 
effects on the cell 
and organism. This 
is over-simplistic. 
Mutations can have 
a neutral effect, due 
to the degeneracy 
of the genetic code. 
Mutations that occur 
on non-coding regions 
of DNA may also have 
no effect on gene 
expression. Other 
mutations can be 
beneficial, leading to 
an adaptive advantage. 
Some mutations are 
harmful, leading to 
deleterious effects 
on the organism (see 
below).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D1.3   Mutation and gene editing
639
 
■Figure D1.3.1 Huntington’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by 
multiple insertions of a trinucleotide repeat sequence (CAG)
Huntington’s disease is extremely rare (1 case per 20 000 live births). It is caused by a mutated 
dominant allele (see Chapter D3.2, page 732). The symptoms usually do not appear until the affected 
person is 40–50 years old, by which time they – unaware of the presence of the disease – may have 
passed on the dominant allele to their children. In a pedigree chart (see Chapter D3.2, page 741) of a 
family with Huntington’s disease, the condition tends to occur in one or more members of the family 
in every generation – a characteristic due to a dominant allele (page 728).
TOK
A simple blood test is all that is needed to find out if a person has the mutated dominant allele that 
will lead to Huntington’s disease. Is this knowledge desirable? It would allow a person to prepare 
for the onset of the disease and may be relevant to their decision of whether to have children. 
However, the knowledge might be very distressing to someone who discovers that they have an 
ultimately fatal disease. The development of our understanding of genetics means that this type 
of knowledge of what will happen to us in the future might become far more common. Is this 
knowledge good for us?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
 
■Deletion: delta 32 mutation of the CCR5 gene
The delta 32 mutation of the CCR5 gene is an example of a deletion mutation. People who have two 
copies of the delta 32 mutation (i.e. a copy of the allele has been received from both parents) are less 
susceptible to HIV-1 infection. 
The deletion mutation prevents the functional expression of the CCR5 protein co-receptor normally 
used by HIV-1 to enter CD4+ T-cells (page 530). T-cells (T-lymphocytes) are white blood cells 
processed by the thymus and responsible for cell-mediated immunity (page 523): CD4+ T-cells 
are the type of lymphocyte that is infected by HIV. The HIV can no longer bind to this co-receptor 
and so cannot efficiently enter cells (Figure D1.3.2). The CCR5 mutation does not lead to complete 
resistance, although it does significantly lessen the likelihood of infection. The virus can use 
alternative, less-efficient co-factors to enable infection to occur. That has not stopped interest in 
using this observation as a possible effective therapy or preventative measure.
Link
T-lymphocytes are 
covered in Chapter 
C3.2, page 523.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Molecules
640
CD4+ T-cells
HIV
CCR5 receptor
With CCR5
To enter cells, one
thing that most
HIV strains must
do is bind to
CCR5, a molecule
that protrudes
from the cells'
surface.
Without CCR5
Some people are born
with a mutation that
prevents CCR5 from
appearing on their
cells, making them
resistant to HIV.
Some experimental
gene therapy
approaches aim to
mimic this mutation
in AIDS patients.
 
■Figure D1.3.2 The delta 32 mutation of the CCR5 gene changes the 
shape of the CCR5 receptor protein on the surface of the white blood cell 
(CD4+ T-cells), so HIV can no longer efficiently bind and infect the cell
Scientists believe that the CCR5 delta 32 mutation existed as much as 2500 years ago but occurred 
only rarely (approximately in 1 out of every 20 000 Europeans). Today, the mutation is much more 
common, occurring in 1 in 10 people. Scientists think that a viral disease provided the selection 
pressure needed to increase the frequency of the mutation over time. In humans, certain populations 
have inherited the delta 32 mutation, resulting in the genetic deletion of a portion of the CCR5 gene, 
leading to a conformational change that means it no longer binds to the HIV virus.
Causes of gene mutation
A factor capable of causing a mutation is called a mutagen, and its effects are described as 
‘mutagenic’. These factors are identified and defined in Table D1.3.1.
 
■Table D1.3.1 Principal factors that can increase mutation rates and the likelihood of cancer
Ionising 
radiation
Ionising radiation includes X-rays and radiation (gamma rays, α particles, β particles) from 
various radioactive sources. These may trigger the formation of damaging ions and radicals 
inside the nucleus, leading to the break-up of the DNA.
Non-ionising 
radiation
Non-ionising radiation includes UV light. This is less energetic and therefore less penetrating 
than ionising radiation but, if it is absorbed by the nitrogenous bases of DNA, may modify 
them – causing adjacent bases on the DNA strand to bind to each other instead of binding 
to their partner on the opposite strand (thymine dimers – see page 19).
Bacterial 
infection
Some specific bacterial infections can trigger cancers, for example Helicobacter pylori can 
cause stomach cancer.
Chemicals
Several chemicals that are carcinogens are present in tobacco smoke. Also, prolonged 
exposure to asbestos fibres may trigger cancer in the lining of the thorax cavity (pleural 
membranes). The harm usually becomes apparent only many years later.
Virus 
infection
A specific virus infection, such as with hepatitis B and C viruses, human papillomavirus (HPV) 
and HIV, may trigger DNA mutations. The HPV mutation is the result of insertion of part of 
the virus genome into that of the host. The virus genes produce proteins that alter the cell 
cycle controls and so lead to uncontrolled replication of the cells.
As well as by mutagens, mutation can be caused by errors in DNA replication or repair. DNA 
polymerase has a role in ‘proofreading’ during DNA replication, to ensure that the base code is 
copied correctly. Any mistakes lead to the error being removed. It is estimated that, in eukaryotes, 
DNA polymerases make errors approximately once every 104–105 nucleotides copied. This means 
that each time a diploid mammalian cell replicates, between 100 000 and 1 000 000 polymerase 
3	 Explain, using 
an example, the 
consequences 
of an insertion 
mutation.
	
◆Mutagen: an 
agent that causes gene 
mutations; anything 
that causes a mutation 
may cause a cancer, 
such as chemicals in 
tobacco smoke, X-rays, 
short-wave UV light and 
some viruses.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D1.3   Mutation and gene editing
641
errors occur. Most of these are corrected, but when this mechanism fails, a mutation occurs. 
When the error occurs in a coding sequence of DNA, a gene mutation may occur, which can lead to 
a change in the protein synthesized.
Randomness in mutation
Mutation is a random process. Mutations are more likely to occur at certain times in the cell cycle 
than at other times, such as during DNA replication. Certain conditions or chemicals may cause 
change to the DNA sequence of bases (page 640). It is important to note that, although there are 
artificial ways of increasing the chance of mutation, there is no known natural mechanism for 
making a deliberate change to a particular base with the purpose of changing a trait. Evolution by 
natural selection is a process that selects favourable alleles that have been generated by random 
mutation, rather than created by a deliberate mechanism within the nucleus of a cell. 
There are two types of DNA substitution mutations (Figure D1.3.3). 
Transitions are swaps between bases of similar shape, so between adenine 
and guanine, the two-ring purines, or between cytosine and thymine, the one-
ring pyrimidines. Transversions are swaps between a purine and a pyrimidine 
base. Transition mutations are more common because they keep the same ring 
shape and, therefore, overall structure when bases form complementary pairs. 
In addition, transitions are less likely to result in amino acid substitutions (due 
to the degeneracy of the genetic code, page 620). They are therefore more likely 
to persist as ‘silent substitutions’ with no phenotypic effect (i.e. no changes 
in the physical traits of the organism) in populations as single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs). Not all SNPs are transitions though.
The most common mutations are at the sequence CG (often written as 
CpG, i.e. with a phosphate in between). The proofreading process is ‘blind’ 
to the location of the bases it is correcting, which raises the question as to 
why these sequences are often mutated. CpG couplets are more difficult to 
correct because both C and G involve three hydrogen bonds to pair with the 
base on the opposite strand, which means that this region of DNA is more 
strongly held together than if it was two purines side by side or a purine 
and a pyrimidine. Regions rich in CpG are often highly methylated, making 
proofreading a bit more difficult.
Top tip!
Environmentally induced mutations due to exposure to a mutational stimulus are biased because of 
the relative likelihood of exposure to specific stimuli, so they are not all equally likely. 
Mutations are not randomly distributed in genomes as may be expected. There are ‘hot spots’ of 
mutation. Possible reasons for this include:
l	 variations in the superstructure of DNA (‘DNA superstructure’ refers to large-scale 
organizational structures within chromosomes, such as segments of code that can be tens of 
millions of nucleotides long)
l	 regions where accessory proteins are less common, leading to an increased localised error rate 
that exceeds the correction rate.
4	 Outline three 
external causes of 
DNA mutation.
Link
For HL students, 
methylation as an 
example of epigenetic 
tagging is discussed 
in Chapter D2.2, 
page 673.
5	 Explain why 
some bases have a 
higher probability 
of mutating than 
others.
pyrimidines
purines
pyrimidines
purines
NH2
CH3
N
N
H
O
O
H
transitions
transitions
N
N
N
N
H
N
N
NH2
O
H
thymine
NH2
N
N
H
N
N
O
guanine
adenine
cytosine
transversions
transversions
 
■Figure D1.3.3 Different types of substitution 
mutations: transversions are between different 
types of base (purines and pyrimidines), while 
transitions are between the same type of base 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Molecules
642
Consequences of mutation in 
germ cells and somatic cells
Mutations occurring in ovaries or testes (or anthers or embryo sacs of flowering plants) are called 
germ line mutations. Since these mutations occur in germ cells that give rise to gametes, they may 
be passed to the offspring. These can result in inherited diseases, for example Huntington’s disease 
(page 638).
Meanwhile, mutations that occur in body cells of multicellular organisms (somatic mutations) are 
only passed on to the immediate descendants of those cells, and they disappear when the organism 
dies. New mutations acquired during the lifetime of an individual in somatic cells are not heritable. 
Such mutations can lead, however, to cancers (see Chapter D2.1, page 667).
Mutation as a source of genetic variation
In Chapter A3.1, we saw that variation between organisms is a defining feature of life, with no two 
individuals identical in all their traits. The original source of all genetic variation is gene mutation. 
Alleles, which are different versions of the same gene (Chapter A1.2, page 21), are created by random 
mutations in genes. Many mutations, if they affect part of the non-coding region of a chromosome, 
are neutral and have no phenotypic effect. Other mutations may be harmful (e.g. sickle cell anaemia, 
page 623). However, mutations are essential in the long term for evolution by natural selection 
(Chapter D4.1). Because all individuals in a population are different, changes to the environment can 
lead to some having a selective advantage, with increased chance of survival, leading ultimately to 
changes in the gene pool of a species. If reproductive isolation occurs (Chapter A4.1, page 149), 
speciation can take place.
 
■Figure D1.3.4 Variation in the colour and patterning of ladybird 
beetles – the result of mutations over many generations
	
◆Germ cell: a 
reproductive cell of 
the body.
Link
For HL students, 
tumours and cancer 
are discussed in 
Chapter D2.1, 
page 667.
6	 Distinguish 
between the 
effects of mutations 
in germ cells and 
somatic cells.
Link
Variation between 
organisms as a 
defining feature of life 
is covered in Chapter 
A3.1, page 102; 
evolution as change 
in the heritable 
characteristics of a 
population is covered 
in Chapter A4.1, 
page 138.
Link
Natural selection 
is covered in detail 
in Chapter D4.1, 
page 779.
7	 State the original 
source of all 
genetic variation.
Concept: 
Change
Mutation leads to 
variation within a 
population. This 
variation is the basis 
for selection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D1.3   Mutation and gene editing
643
Nature of science: Global impact of science
Predictive genetic tests can provide consumers with knowledge of their health status and potential 
future health and disease risk, as well as providing commercial opportunities. ‘Over-the-counter’ and 
mail-order genetic tests are now available. However, this information could be problematic without 
expert interpretation. Issues associated with these tests include:
l	 Regulation of testing companies is currently lacking.
l	 This type of genetic testing cannot tell definitively whether an individual will or will not get a 
particular disease. Results often need to be confirmed with genetic tests carried out by a doctor 
or nurse.
l	 Tests may not be available for the health conditions that are of interest to an individual.
l	 They only test for a subset of variants within genes, so disease-causing variants can be missed.
l	 Unexpected information about the health of an individual may be stressful or upsetting.
l	 Test are carried out outside of a healthcare clinic, and so individuals are often not provided with 
genetic counselling.
l	 Individuals may make important decisions about disease treatment or prevention based on 
inaccurate, incomplete or misunderstood information from test results.
To address some of these issues, the sale of genetic tests to individuals can be made subject to 
ethical guidelines, for example to protect vulnerable groups. 
TOK
How might the context 
in which knowledge 
is presented influence 
whether it is accepted 
or rejected?
A genetics test 
prescribed by a 
doctor may be more 
acceptable to an 
individual or society 
than one bought over 
the counter. Why 
would this be the case, 
if the genetic tests are 
identical?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Gene knockout
Gene knockout (KO) produces an organism with one non-functional gene, allowing researchers to 
investigate the function of that gene. The technique is used on model organisms. A model organism 
is a non-human organism that can be used to understand simple and complex biological functions. 
One model organism used for gene knockout is the mouse (Mus musculus). Researchers knock out or 
destroy the function of a particular gene (usually by introducing a deletion) and observe the effect on 
the phenotype.
The gene knockout technique has been used to create the p53 KO mouse, which has a mutated 
version of the p53 gene. Normally, the p53 gene directs the synthesis of a protein that regulates the 
cell cycle. When the protein is absent, tumour cells are created, increasing the risk of bone and other 
cancers in mammals. 
Another remarkable example of this technique is the 
Methuselah KO mouse; increased longevity is shown in these 
mutants, allowing researchers to study the complexity of aging 
and potentially leading to prevention of human aging diseases 
and better treatments. As shown in Figure D1.3.5, the obese 
KO mouse can give insights into the metabolic disorders that 
are involved in obesity in humans.
Following the development of the gene knockout technique, 
the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded 
to three scientists: Mario R. Capecchi (Italy), Martin J. Evans 
and Oliver Smithies (both UK). There is now a library of 
knockout organisms for some species that are used as models 
in research (see next section).
	
◆Gene knockout 
(KO): technique that 
produces a genetically 
engineered organism with 
one non-functional gene, 
allowing researchers to 
investigate the function of 
that gene.
	
◆Mutant: organism 
with altered genetic 
material (abruptly altered 
by a mutation).
 
■Figure D1.3.5 A mouse that has a knockout gene (left) 
compared with a normal mouse (right); the mouse with 
the knocked out gene showed an increase in body fat and 
developed metabolic-related disorders, leading to obesity
8	 Define the term 
gene knockout.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Molecules
644
 
■Model organisms are useful for studying gene function
The way in which a gene controls a function can be studied using model organisms, enabling 
researchers to then apply the findings to other organisms, such as humans. These model organisms 
can range from bacteria, such as Escherichia coli (E. coli), to mammals, such as the mouse (Mus 
musculus). Some plant models, for example Arabidopsis thaliana, are widely used for investigating 
crops and other plants.
It is the universality of the genetic code and commonality of the basal biological processes performed 
by almost all living organisms, such as oxidative phosphorylation during aerobic respiration, that 
make the use of model organisms possible. Studies, performed in vivo using model organisms, such as 
gene knockout, are extremely valuable as they can predict similar effects in closely related organisms.
 
■Table D1.3.2 Some of the most common model organisms used
Name and type of organism
Example of its use
Caenorhabditis 
elegans (C. elegans)
nematode (soil 
roundworm)
understanding organ development and programmed cell 
death (apoptosis)
Drosophila 
melanogaster
insect (fruit fly)
a high homology with human cells means that the fruit fly 
is being used to study Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s 
disease in humans
Danio rerio
vertebrate (zebra 
fish)
embryos are transparent, allowing non-invasive in vivo 
imagery to obtain data about the circulatory system; also 
useful in the understanding of the process of metastasis
Arabidopsis thaliana
angiospermophyte 
(flowering plant)
first plant to have had its genome sequenced; used in a 
variety of studies, such as understanding floral production 
and the effects of environmental stress in plants
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Exploring; designing
Research a model organism and how it is used in experimental research. Ensure you 
consult a variety of sources and select sufficient and relevant sources of information.
Design your own theoretical investigation using the organism. Which organism have 
you selected and why? In which ways does your organism acts as a model? 
Formulate a research question and hypothesis. State and explain your predictions using 
your scientific understanding.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Common 
mistake
Many people have an 
idea of why model 
organisms are used, 
but few can outline the 
benefits clearly. Make 
sure you know why 
each model organism 
is used in scientific 
investigations (see 
Table D1.3.2).
Use of the CRISPR sequences and the 
enzyme Cas9 in gene editing
Prokaryotic cells have a mechanism to defend themselves against infection comparable to, but very 
different from, the immune response found in eukaryotic cells. In a prokaryotic cell, the response to 
a ‘foreign’ invasion is based on a region of DNA sequences called CRISPR, which stands for clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats. These CRISPR sequences are used for an immune 
response that protects the prokaryote from bacteriophages (a type of virus that attacks bacterial 
cells). Along with the CRISPR-associated Cas9 enzyme, bacteria use the sequences to recognize and 
deactivate future invading viruses.
l	 When bacteria are infected by a virus, they use their CRISPR system to cut up the invading viral 
DNA and insert pieces of it (spacers) into their own genome as a ‘memory’ of the infection.
	
◆CRISPR sequences: 
sequences in the 
genomes of some 
prokaryotes that act as 
a genomic record of 
previous viral attack.
	
◆Cas9 enzyme: a 
bacterial endonuclease 
that forms a double-
strand break in DNA at a 
specific target site within 
a larger recognition 
sequence.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D1.3   Mutation and gene editing
645
l	 Bacteria transcribe the spacers into RNA, which can form a complex with the Cas9 enzyme. 
These complexes monitor the cell for any DNA sequence complementary to the RNA. When 
DNA sequences complementary to the DNA are identified, the Cas9 enzyme is activated.
l	 If matching (viral) DNA is encountered, the spacer RNA–Cas9 complex binds to it and cuts the 
viral DNA at specific locations to prevent it from replicating. This halts the viral infection.
Scientists Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna were awarded the Nobel Prize for 
Chemistry in 2020 for their collaborative work with the CRISPR-Cas9 ‘genetic scissors’, developing 
the precise genome-editing technology. This was the first time a Nobel Prize had been won by two 
women alone. Scientists can use this technology to edit the human genome (Figure D1.3.6).
DNA target
sequences
Cas9 enzyme
guide RNA
recognized sequence
for specific cutting
target sequences
are cut off
desired DNA sequences
are added
unwanted
sequences
desired
sequences
DNA template
customized DNA
 
■Figure D1.3.6 CRISPR and its application in gene editing
 ATL D1.3A 
Find out about how CRISPR technology can be used to treat genetic diseases. Use this weblink as 
a starting point:
www.bio-rad.com/en-uk/applications-technologies/crispr-cas-gene-editing-teaching-
resources?ID=Q58I0DWDLBV5
Summarize, in a poster or PowerPoint, how CRISPR technology can be used to treat genetic diseases.
The precise specificity of the CRISPR system offers many opportunities for use in modifying any 
gene of interest with significantly reduced risk of accidentally affecting other genes. Researchers are 
looking to CRISPR as a technique for editing out genetic defects that result in cystic fibrosis, sickle 
cell disease, haemophilia and muscular dystrophy, for example, as well as for developing more 
targeted and effective cancer treatments. One study showed that adult rats genetically engineered to 
have a genetic form of blindness could be treated using CRISPR gene therapy, which means that their 
offspring would not have the genes that cause genetic blindness. The goal of human gene editing is 
to remove diseased cells, ‘fixed’ (i.e. the genetic mutation removed and corrected for a code that is 
functional) using CRISPR technology, and then returned to patients to treat the genetic condition. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Molecules
646
Genome editing requires bio-molecular tools to specifically recognize a target sequence on the 
genome and cut it in a precise way. Cas9 recognizes the target DNA via a guide RNA. Multiple types 
of Cas enzymes are found in nature, but Cas9 is commonly used in the laboratory. Research is being 
carried out to identify and manufacture guide RNA for specific genetic diseases. Scientists have used 
CRISPR technology to insert particular selected sequences of a genome into the Cas9 protein. 
This allows for adding, replacing and removing genetic sequences from genes, opening many 
opportunities for research.
 
■Successful use of CRISPR technology: treating sickle 
cell anaemia
CRISPR is revolutionizing many aspects of biotechnology, scientific research and genetic disorder 
treatment. Sickle cell disease is a blood disorder that can be difficult to treat effectively (page 623). 
In an experimental treatment, scientists used CRISPR to edit a gene from a patient’s bone marrow so 
the cells would produce foetal haemoglobin – a form of haemoglobin that stops being made shortly 
after birth. By restarting production of foetal haemoglobin, scientists hoped this form of haemoglobin 
could compensate for the sickle-shaped haemoglobin. In one patient, blood tests showed that 
approximately 46% of the haemoglobin was foetal haemoglobin and it remained present in 99.7% 
of red blood cells. Further samples of bone marrow found more than 81% of the cells contained the 
genetic change needed to produce foetal haemoglobin. This showed the edited cells were continuing 
to survive and function in the patient’s body for a sustained period.
 ATL D1.3B 
Find out more about CRISPR technology and how it is being used to treat sickle cell anaemia. 
Use this site as a starting point: www.synthego.com/crispr-sickle-cell-disease#:~:text= 
Victoria%20Gray%20was%20the%20first,without%20any%20major%20side%20effects
Produce a poster to summarize the key points. What is sickle cell anaemia and what causes this genetic 
disease? What current treatments exist? How can CRISPR technology be used to treat the disease?
Nature of science: Global impact of science
Despite the potential of CRISPR-Cas9 in treating many genetic diseases, the use of CRISPR to 
change genetic traits in humans has raised serious concerns within the scientific community. 
Possible unintended effects include:
l	 potential off-target mutations (unintended mutations) in the genome; such mutations may 
be deleterious
l	 the cost of germ line-editing technology is very high, to the extent that only people from rich 
countries might afford it.
The ease of applying CRISPR has caused worry about the potential misuse of the technology. 
Certain potential uses of CRISPR raise ethical issues that must be addressed before 
implementation, including:
l	 genome editing in human embryos, which could have unpredictable effects on the future 
generation
l	 the use of the technology for non-therapeutic modifications, leading to loss of human diversity 
and eugenics.
Scientists across the world are subject to different regulatory systems. For this reason, there is an 
international effort to harmonize the regulation of the application of genome-editing technologies 
such as CRISPR. 
	
◆Genome editing: 
the manipulation of DNA 
by deleting, replacing or 
inserting a DNA sequence, 
with the aim of, for 
example, correcting a 
genetic disorder.
Concept: 
Change
Genome editing 
changes the 
genetic code of an 
organism. This can 
be used to treat 
genetic disorders.
TOK
That scientists work 
under regulatory 
systems is a 
prime example of 
how knowledge 
communities do not 
exist in isolation. 
Social, political and 
financial concerns 
can be present in 
the development of 
scientific knowledge 
and can impact on its 
development. The peer 
review of scientific 
research also means 
that scientists work 
within a framework 
that ensures 
collaboration and 
mutual support.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D1.3   Mutation and gene editing
647
	ATL D1.3C 
Write an essay on one of the following two titles:
l	 What measures can be taken to regulate the application of genome editing?  
(Propose specific measures to help regulate the application of genome editing. In explaining 
these measures, include details of the CRISPR-Cas9 technology, its applications, and ethical issues 
relating to its use.)
l	 To what extent should CRISPR technology be encouraged, restricted or prohibited? 
(On a continuous scale from widespread use to total prohibition, choose and define a position.  
In defending that position, use and explain details of the CRISPR-Cas9 technology, its 
applications, and ethical issues relating to its use.)
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Hypotheses for conserved or highly 
conserved sequences in genes
In Chapter A2.1, conserved genetic sequences were identified as a way of providing evidence about 
the structure and function of the first life on Earth (LUCA). Conserved sequences are identical or 
similar sequences in nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) across species or a group of species. Highly 
conserved genetic sequences are identical or similar over long periods of evolution.
Examples of highly conserved sequences include proteins associated with ribosomes, which are 
organelles present in all domains of life. There are two hypotheses that explain the mechanism for 
conserved sequences:
l	 functional requirements for the gene products; highly conserved sequences are usually required 
for basic cellular stability, function and reproduction, and so must be maintained from one 
generation to the next and on throughout evolutionary history
l	 slower rates of mutation than the background mutation rate. 
Research has shown that mutation rate is linked to the level of gene expression. Highly transcribed 
genes generally show lower mutation rates that less expressed genes. It has also been noted that 
the transcribed strand of a gene shows a lower mutation rate than the non-transcribed strand. 
The impact of gene expression on mutation rate may be due to enhanced proofreading and, 
therefore, repair mechanisms for these sections of DNA.
In addition to protein coding sequences, the genome contains a significant amount of regulatory 
DNA (page 626). These non-coding regions contain highly conserved sequences. In vertebrates, 
these sequences are in and around genes that act as developmental regulators. Highly conserved 
regions for transcription factors related to embryonic and subsequent development is further 
evidence for a common origin of all vertebrates (see also Chapter A2.1, page 47).
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How can natural selection lead to both a reduction in variation and an increase in biological diversity?
2	 How does variation in subunit composition of polymers contribute to function?
	
◆Conserved 
sequences: identical 
or similar sequences in 
nucleic acids (DNA and 
RNA), across species 
or a group of species, 
that have remained 
essentially unchanged 
throughout evolution.
Link
Conserved genetic 
sequences and the 
evidence for the 
evolution of the last 
universal common 
ancestor is discussed 
in Chapter A2.1, 
page 47.
9	 Suggest why 
some genes are 
conserved.
