Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
648
Cell and nuclear division
D2.1
•	 How can large numbers of genetically identical cells be produced?
•	 How do eukaryotes produce genetically varied cells that can develop into gametes?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D2.1.1 	 Generation of new cells in living organisms by cell division 
	 D2.1.2 	 Cytokinesis as splitting of cytoplasm in a parent cell between daughter cells
	 D2.1.3 	 Equal and unequal cytokinesis
	 D2.1.4 	 Roles of mitosis and meiosis in eukaryotes
	 D2.1.5 	 DNA replication as a prerequisite for both mitosis and meiosis
	 D2.1.6 	 Condensation and movement of chromosomes as shared features of mitosis 
and meiosis
	 D2.1.7 	 Phases of mitosis
	 D2.1.8 	 Identification of phases of mitosis
	 D2.1.9 	 Meiosis as a reduction division
	 D2.1.10 	Down syndrome and non-disjunction
	 D2.1.11 	Meiosis as a source of variation
	 D2.1.12 	Cell proliferation for growth, cell replacement and tissue repair (HL only)
	 D2.1.13 	Phases of the cell cycle (HL only)
	 D2.1.14 	Cell growth during interphase (HL only)
	 D2.1.15 	Control of the cell cycle using cyclins (HL only)
	 D2.1.16 	Consequences of mutations in genes that control the cell cycle (HL only)
	 D2.1.17 	Differences between tumours in rates of cell division and growth, and in the 
capacity for metastasis and invasion of neighbouring tissue (HL only)
Generation of new cells in living 
organisms by cell division
Cell theory states that all cells arise from pre-existing cells (Chapter A2.2, page 50). Multicellular 
organisms begin life as a single cell, which grows and divides. During growth, this cycle is repeated, 
forming many cells. Initially, stem cells can become any other type of cell, but during embryonic 
development cell specialization occurs (see Chapter B2.3). It is these cells that eventually make up 
the adult organism. In all living organisms, a parent cell – often referred to as a ‘mother’ cell – 
divides to produce two daughter cells.
There are two types of cell division – one produces genetically identical daughter cells and the other 
genetically different (varied) cells. Both types of cell division will be discussed in this section.
 ATL D2.1A 
Do cells divide a fixed number of times, or can they do this continually with no set number of divisions? 
Find out about the ‘Hayflick limit’, which is the number of times a normal group of differentiated (i.e. 
specialized) human body cells will divide before cell division stops. Are there exceptions to this ‘limit’?
	
◆Parent cell: cell that 
divides to form daughter 
cells by mitosis or meiosis.
	
◆Daughter cells: 
cells produced when a 
cell divides by mitosis or 
meiosis.
Concept: 
Continuity
All cells arise from 
pre-existing cells 
via cell division. 
This process allows 
the genetic code, 
which determines 
the structure 
and function of 
the organism, to 
be passed on to 
new cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
649
Cytokinesis
In cell division, the nucleus and cytoplasm will divide. Division of 
the cytoplasm is known as cytokinesis and follows the final stage of 
nuclear division. During division, cell organelles such as mitochondria 
and chloroplasts become distributed evenly between the cells. In animal 
cells, division is by in-tucking of the plasma membrane at the equator of 
the cell, ‘pinching’ the cytoplasm in half (Figure D2.1.1). A ring of actin, 
myosin and other proteins form a ‘contractile ring’ that pinches the cell 
membrane together to split the cytoplasm.
In plant cells, the Golgi apparatus forms vesicles of new cell wall 
materials, which collect along the line of the equator of the spindle, 
known as the cell plate. Here the vesicles combine to form the new 
plasma membranes and cell walls between the two cells (Figure D2.1.2).
plant cell after nucleus has divided
daughter nucleus
vesicles collect at the midline
then fuse to form cell wall
layers + new cell membrane
cytoplasm
remains of the spindle
ER secretes vesicles of
wall-forming enzymes
cellulose cell wall
Golgi apparatus secretes
vesicles of wall
components
cell plate
(equator of spindle)
daughter
cells
 
■Figure D2.1.2 Cytokinesis in a plant cell
Top tip!
Cytokinesis differs between animal and plant cells. Plant cells cannot proceed with a cleavage 
furrow because they have a cell wall and animal cells do not. Plants must first form a cell plate, 
which divides the old cell into two new ones. Vesicles assemble sections of membrane and cell wall 
to achieve splitting. In an animal cell, a ring of contractile actin and myosin proteins pinches the cell 
membrane together to split the cytoplasm.
Equal and unequal cytokinesis
When cells divide to form new cells in a body tissue, the division of cytoplasm is usually equal, so 
that two daughter cells of equal size are produced (Figure D2.1.2). Both daughter cells must receive 
at least one mitochondrion and, in plants, a chloroplast. These are the only organelles that can be 
made by dividing a pre-existing structure.
However, in some cases the division of cytoplasm is not equal. For example, in egg production in 
humans, a process known as oogenesis, one large egg (ovum) is formed as well as several small cells 
that do not go forward for fertilization. Oogenesis begins in the ovaries of the foetus before birth, but 
cytoplasm
divides
in-tucking of plasma
membrane at the
equator of the cell
 
■Figure D2.1.1 Cytokinesis: the division of the cytoplasm
Link
Oogenesis is covered 
in detail in Chapter 
D3.1, page 710.
	
◆Cytokinesis: splitting of cytoplasm in a parent 
cell between daughter cells, following the division of 
the nucleus.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
650
the final development of oocytes is only completed in adult life. An oocyte is an immature egg cell 
(ovum). When a primary oocyte divides, the cytoplasmic division that follows is unequal, forming a 
tiny polar body and a secondary oocyte. Similarly, when the secondary oocyte divides, another polar 
body is formed (Figure D2.1.3).
The polar bodies degenerate, and their cytoplasm and cellular contents are absorbed by the final 
ovum. This means that one large egg is formed rather than four smaller structures. The ovum needs 
a large cytoplasm to provide nutrients and energy for the growing embryo.
 ATL D2.1B 
Yeast, a single-celled fungus, also divides by unequal division of the cytoplasm. Cell division in 
yeast is known as budding. Find out about budding in yeast, and the reasons why cytokinesis 
forms daughter cells that are unequal in size. 
Roles of mitosis and meiosis in eukaryotes
Divisions of the nucleus occur by a very precise process, ensuring the correct distribution of 
chromosomes between the new cells (daughter cells). Nuclear division must happen before cell 
division to avoid production of anucleate cells (cells without a nucleus). If nuclear division does not 
take place, one daughter cell would have a nucleus and the other would not. 
There are two types of nuclear division: mitosis and meiosis. Both produce daughter cells from a 
parent cell. The number of cells produced and the form of genetic material varies between mitosis and 
meiosis, as will be discussed later in this chapter. Mitosis maintains the chromosome number and 
genome of cells, whereas meiosis halves the chromosome number and generates genetic diversity.
In mitosis, the daughter cells produced have the same number of chromosomes as the parent cell, 
typically two of each type, known as the diploid (2n) state. Mitosis is the nuclear division that 
occurs when an organism grows, when old cells are replaced, and when an organism reproduces 
asexually. Mitosis is explained on page 653 in this chapter.
In meiosis, the daughter cells contain half the number of chromosomes of the parent cell. That is, 
one chromosome of each type is present in the nuclei formed; this is known as the haploid (n) state. 
Meiosis is the nuclear division that occurs when sexual reproduction occurs, normally during the 
formation of the gametes.
The differences between mitosis and meiosis are summarized in Figure D2.1.4. 
Top tip!
Mitosis and meiosis only occur in eukaryotes. Prokaryotes divide by a process called binary fission.
1	 Explain why 
some cell divisions 
produce cells that 
are unequal in size.
	
◆Mitosis: nuclear 
division in which the 
daughter nuclei have 
the same number of 
chromosomes as the 
parent cell.
	
◆Meiosis: nuclear 
division with daughter 
cells (gametes) containing 
half the number of 
chromosomes of the 
parent cell.
	
◆Diploid: cells with 
nuclei containing two sets 
of chromosomes.
	
◆Haploid: cells with 
nuclei containing one set 
of chromosomes.
primary
oocyte
secondary
oocyte
polar
body
ovum
 
■Figure D2.1.3 The 
unequal division of 
the cytoplasm in 
human oogenesis


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
651
meiosis
mitosis
ﬁrst the chromosomes
appear as thin threads
nuclear division by meiosis (reduction division)
occurs when sexual reproduction occurs (e.g. when
gametes are formed in mammals and plants)
nuclear division by mitosis (replication)
occurs when organisms grow and develop,
and tissues are repaired or replaced
cell about to divide
nuclear 
membrane
nucleolus
chromatin
two cells are formed, each with nuclei 
identical to that of the parent cell – diploid (2n)
four cells are formed, each with half the 
chromosome number – haploid (n)
 
■Figure D2.1.4 Mitosis and meiosis – the significant differences
DNA replication as a prerequisite 
for both mitosis and meiosis
DNA replication occurs in a stage of the cell cycle called interphase. The process produces double-
stranded chromosomes. Each strand is called a chromatid. Chromatids are held together by a 
centromere: a specialized DNA sequence that can be seen as the constricted region of a 
chromosome (Figure D2.1.5). During nuclear division, each of the sister chromatids separate and 
move into different cells.
chromosome
consisting
of one
chromatid
interphase
centromere
duplicated
chromosome
sister
chromatids
mitosis
daughter
chromosomes
 
■Figure D2.1.5 Changes in chromosomes during interphase and mitosis (nuclear division)
Common mistake
To avoid confusion in terminology, you should refer to the two parts of a chromosome as 
sister chromatids while they are attached to each other by a centromere in the early stages of 
mitosis. Once the chromatids have been separated into separate cells, they can be referred to as 
distinct chromosomes.
2	 Suggest why it 
is essential that 
nuclear division is a 
precise process.
	
◆Interphase: the period 
between nuclear divisions 
when the nucleus controls 
and directs the activity 
of the cell and replicates 
chromosomes. 
	
◆Chromatid: one 
of two copies of a 
chromosome after it 
has replicated, joined 
together at a centromere.
	
◆Centromere: 
constriction of the 
chromosome, the region 
that becomes attached 
to the spindle fibres 
during nuclear division.
Link
For HL students, the 
details of interphase 
are on page 665.
Concept: 
Continuity
For new cells to 
form, DNA must 
first replicate so 
that copies of the 
genome can be 
sent into each new 
cell. In this way, the 
genetic code of an 
organism continues 
into new cells. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
652
Condensation and movement of chromosomes 
as shared features of mitosis and meiosis
The total length of the DNA in all 46 human chromosomes is over 2 m. Each chromosome contains one 
very long DNA molecule. A typical chromosome of 5 μm length contains DNA that is approximately 
50 mm long, which means that about 50 000 μm of DNA is packed into 5 μm of chromosome. Today 
we know that, while some of the proteins of the chromosome are enzymes involved in the copying and 
repair reactions of DNA, the bulk of chromosome protein has a support and packaging role for DNA.
DNA in the nucleus is packaged with proteins in a complex known as chromatin. Here, the 
much-coiled DNA double helix of each chromosome is looped around histone protein beads 
(nucleosomes, Figure D2.1.6). Histones are one sort of packaging protein. Histones are a basic 
(positively charged) protein containing a high concentration of amino acid molecules with additional 
basic functional groups (–NH2), such as lysine and arginine. These histones occur clumped together, 
and provide support to the lengths of the DNA double helix that occur wrapped around them, giving 
the appearance of beads on a thread. The ‘bead thread’ is itself coiled up, forming the chromatin 
fibre. The chromatin fibre is again coiled, and the coils are looped around a ‘scaffold’ protein fibre, 
made of a non-histone protein. This whole structure is folded again (supercoiled) into the much-
condensed metaphase chromosome (Figure D2.1.7).
loosely packed nucleosomes 
following acetylation – transcription 
enzymes have access to DNA
tightly packed nucleosomes – 
transcription enzymes are excluded
part of a supercoiled DNA strand 
looped around histone proteins 
forming tightly packed 
nucleosomes
core of each nucleosome 
(8 tightly packed histone 
molecules forming a 
bead-like structure)
DNA strand
histone tails
acetyl group
(–COCH3)
the double helix of DNA
acetyl group attached
to lysine in histone tail
 
■Figure D2.1.6 Histone proteins forming tightly packed nucleosomes
	
◆Histone: protein 
(rich in the amino acids 
arginine and lysine) that 
forms the scaffolding 
of chromosomes and 
is used in chromosome 
condensation to form 
nucleosomes.
	
◆Nucleosome: the 
basic unit of eukaryotic 
chromosome structure 
consisting of a ball of 
eight histone molecules 
wrapped about by two 
coils of about 220 base 
pairs of DNA.
	
◆Supercoiling: form 
of DNA in which the 
double helix is further 
twisted about itself within 
nucleosomes, forming a 
tightly coiled structure.
Link
For HL students, 
nucleosome structure 
is covered in Chapter 
A1.2, page 26.
 
■Figure D2.1.7 The 
packaging of DNA in 
the chromosomes


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
653
Chromosomes are moved during cell division using microtubules and microtubule motors. 
Microtubules are cytoskeletal fibres that are able to lengthen and shorten by polymerization and 
depolymerization of tubulin (Chapter A2.2, page 72). The movement of chromosomes during 
cell division is achieved by the lengthening and shortening of microtubules. The movement of 
chromosomes is facilitated by motor proteins (Chapter A2.2, Figure A2.2.25, page 73) carrying them 
along the microtubules to the middle of the cell, ready for nuclear division.
TOK
In 1922 the number of chromosomes counted in a human cell was 48. This remained the 
established number for over 30 years, until 1956 when Joe Hin Tjio and Albert Levan published a 
paper in which they proposed that the number of human chromosomes was 46, not 48. Why are 
we slow to change our beliefs? How can we judge when evidence is adequate?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Phases of mitosis
When cell division occurs, the nucleus divides first. In mitosis, the chromosomes, present as the 
chromatids formed during the interphase part of the cell cycle (see page 665, HL only), are 
separated, and accurately and precisely distributed to two daughter nuclei. Each of the daughter cells 
are identical to each other and to the parent cell.
Here, mitosis is presented and explained as a process in four phases (Figure D2.1.8), but remember 
this is for convenience of description only. Mitosis is a continuous process with no breaks between 
the phases. 
You can follow the events of mitosis in Figure D2.1.8.
l	 In prophase, the chromosomes become visible as long thin threads. Now, they increasingly 
shorten and thicken by a process of supercoiling. You can see an electron micrograph of a 
supercoiled chromosome in Figure D2.1.7. It is only possible to see at the end of prophase that 
chromosomes consist of two chromatids held together at the centromere. At the same time, the 
nucleolus gradually disappears and the nuclear membrane breaks down.
l	 In metaphase, the centrioles move to opposite ends of the cell. Microtubules in the cytoplasm 
start to form into a spindle, radiating out from the centrioles (Figure D2.1.8). Microtubules 
attach to the centromeres of each pair of chromatids, and these are arranged at the equator of the 
spindle. (Note that, in plant cells, a spindle of exactly the same structure is formed, but without 
the presence of the centrioles.)
l	 In anaphase, the centromeres divide, the spindle fibres shorten and the chromatids are pulled by 
their centromeres to opposite poles. Once separated, the chromatids are referred to as chromosomes.
l	 In telophase, a nuclear membrane reforms around both groups of chromosomes at opposite 
ends of the cell. The chromosomes decondense by uncoiling, becoming chromatin again. 
The nucleolus reforms in each nucleus. Interphase follows division of the cytoplasm.
Common mistake
To avoid confusion in terminology, you should refer to the two parts of a chromosome as 
sister chromatids while they are attached to each other by a centromere in the early stages of 
mitosis. Once the chromatids have been separated into separate cells, they can be referred to as 
distinct chromosomes.
3	 Suggest a main 
advantage of 
chromosomes 
being ‘supercoiled’ 
during metaphase 
of mitosis.
Top tip!
You need to know 
the names of the 
phases of mitosis and 
how the process as a 
whole produces two 
genetically identical 
daughter cells.
	
◆Prophase: first stage 
in nuclear division, mitotic 
or meiotic, where the 
chromosomes condense.
	
◆Metaphase: stage in 
nuclear division (mitosis 
and meiosis) in which 
chromosomes become 
arranged at the equator 
of the spindle.
	
◆Anaphase: stage in 
nuclear division where 
chromosomes move away 
from one another to 
opposite poles of the cell.
	
◆Telophase: a phase 
in nuclear division when 
the nuclear membrane 
reforms around daughter 
cell nuclear material.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
654
microtubule
fibres
centrioles
at pole
equatorial
plate
3D view of spindle
chromatin
cytoplasm
plasma
membrane
nuclear
membrane
pair of
centrioles
nucleolus
Chromosomes are shown here as divided into 
chromatids, but this division is not immediately visible.
interphase
centrioles
duplicate
nucleolus
disappears
chromosomes
condense, and
become visible
nuclear
membrane
breaks down
spindle forms
chromatids joined
by centromere
and attached to
spindle at equator
centromeres divide
chromatids
pulled apart
by microtubules
chromosomes
uncoil
spindle
disappears
nucleolus and
nuclear membrane
reappear
cytoplasm
divides
For simplicity, the drawings
show mitosis in a cell with
a single pair of homologous
chromosomes.
prophase
metaphase
anaphase
telophase
cytokinesis
 
■Figure D2.1.8 Mitosis in an animal cell


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
655
Identification of phases of mitosis
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Preparation of temporary mounts
Observing chromosomes during mitosis
After looking at the photos and diagrams in 
Figure D2.1.8, apply your knowledge by identifying the 
phases of mitosis in cells viewed with a microscope.
Actively dividing cells, such as those at the growing 
points of the root tips of plants, include many cells 
undergoing mitosis. This tissue can be isolated, 
stained with an orcein ethanoic (acetic orcein) stain, 
squashed, and then examined under the high-power 
lens of a microscope. Nuclei at interphase appear 
red–purple with almost colourless cytoplasm, but the 
chromosomes in cells undergoing mitosis will be visible, 
rather as they appear in the photomicrographs in 
Figure D2.1.8. The procedure is summarized in the flow 
diagram in Figure D2.1.9. From the resulting temporary 
slides, the proportion of cells with nuclei at any stage 
of mitosis can be observed. 
Produce a stained slide of a root tip squash, or other 
growing region of a plant. Identify cells that are 
undergoing mitosis and draw the position of the 
chromosomes in these cells, identifying which stage of 
mitosis you can see.
You could also go on to try identifying the phases of 
mitosis in diagrams or micrographs of cells.
5 tissues transferred to a
microscope slide and root tip
cells gently teased apart with
mounted needles
growing roots
onion bulb 
water
beaker
roots
1 the tip of a root 
(5 mm only) cut off 
and retained
3 30 drops of acetic orcein 
stain added, with 3 drops 
of hydrochloric acid (conc)
4 gently heated for 3–5 
minutes using a steam bath 
(or hot plate or by passing 
through a low Bunsen ﬂame)
2 tip transferred to 
a watch glass
heat
7 tissue ﬁrmly squashed by 
‘thumb pressure’ – avoiding 
lateral movements
6 additional drops of stain added 
followed by a cover slip
8 the slide examined 
under the high-power 
objective of the 
microscope
root tip
root tip in LS (LP)
root cap
region of cell division
growing cells
if excess evaporation 
occurs, more stain 
added
 
 
■Figure D2.1.9 The orcein ethanoic stain of an onion root tip squash


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
656
4	 Using slides they had prepared to observe chromosomes during mitosis in a plant root 
tip (Figure D2.1.9), five students observed and recorded the number of nuclei at each 
stage in mitosis in 100 cells as shown in the table below.
Number of nuclei counted
Stage of mitosis
Student 1
Student 2
Student 3
Student 4
Student 5
prophase
64
70
75
68
73
metaphase
13
10
7
11
9
anaphase
5
5
2
8
5
telophase
18
15
16
13
13
a	 Calculate the mean percentage of dividing cells at each stage of mitosis and present 
your results as a pie chart.
b	 Assuming that mitosis takes about 60 minutes to complete in this species of plant, 
deduce what these results imply about the lengths of the four steps.
Meiosis as a reduction division
Meiosis involves two divisions of the nucleus, known as meiosis I and meiosis II. The parent cell is 
diploid, and meiosis produces daughter cells that are haploid. Figure D2.1.10 shows the stages of 
meiosis – refer to this as you read through the text below.
As in mitosis, chromosomes replicate to form chromatids during interphase before meiosis 
occurs. Then, early in meiosis I, homologous chromosomes pair up. By the end of meiosis I, 
homologous chromosomes have separated again, but the chromatids they consist of do not separate 
until meiosis II. Thus, meiosis consists of two nuclear divisions but only one replication of 
the chromosomes. 
In the interphase (page 665) that precedes meiosis, the chromosomes are replicated as chromatids, 
but between meiosis I and II there is no further interphase, so no replication of the chromosomes 
occurs during meiosis.
As meiosis begins, the chromosomes become visible. The parent cell is diploid, containing 
homologous pairs of chromosomes. The homologous chromosomes pair up. (Remember, in a diploid 
cell each chromosome has a partner that is the same length and shape and with the same linear 
sequence of genes. It is these partner chromosomes that pair.)
When the homologous chromosomes have paired up closely, each pair is called a bivalent. Members 
of the bivalent continue to shorten – a process known as condensation.
During the coiling and shortening process within the bivalent, the chromatids frequently break. 
Broken ends rejoin more or less immediately. When non-sister chromatids from homologous 
chromosomes break and rejoin, they do so at exactly corresponding sites, so that a cross-shaped 
structure called a chiasma is formed at one or more places along a bivalent. The event is known as 
a crossing over because lengths of genes have been exchanged between chromatids. This generates 
variation (see page 102).
Next, the spindle forms. Members of the bivalents become attached by their centromeres to the fibres 
of the spindle at the equatorial plate of the cell. Spindle fibres pull the homologous chromosomes 
apart to opposite poles, but the individual chromatids remain attached by their centromeres.
5	 Distinguish 
between the 
terms haploid and 
diploid.
	
◆Bivalent: a pair of 
duplicated homologous 
chromosomes, held 
together by chiasmata 
during meiosis.
	
◆Chiasma (plural, 
chiasmata): site of 
crossing over (exchange) 
of segments of DNA 
between homologous 
chromosomes 
during meiosis.
	
◆Crossing over: 
exchange of genetic 
material between 
two homologous 
chromosomes 
during meiosis.
Top tip!
When drawing the 
stages of mitosis, 
make sure you show 
a membrane (intact 
or disappearing) in 
prophase, the number 
of chromosomes 
changing during 
the different stages, 
and the movement 
of chromosomes 
(not chromatids) in 
anaphase. Make sure 
diagrams are large 
enough so that their 
structures are distinct 
and easily labelled.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
657
during interphase
during meiosis I
during meiosis II
cytokinesis
product of meiosis is
four haploid cells
cell with a single pair of
homologous chromosomes
centromere
chromosome number = 2 (diploid cell)
replication (copying) of
chromosomes occurs
homologous chromosomes
pair up
breakage and reunion of parts of
chromatids have occurred and the 
result is visible now, as chromosomes
separate (crossing over)
homologous chromosomes
separate and enter different
cells – chromosome number
is halved
chromosomes separate 
and enter daughter cells
division of cytoplasm
now
haploid cells
2n
2n
n
n
n
n
n
n
 
■Figure D2.1.10 What happens to chromosomes during meiosis? 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
658
Meiosis I ends with two cells each containing a single set of chromosomes made of two chromatids. 
These cells do not go into interphase, but rather continue smoothly into meiosis II. This takes place 
at right angles to meiosis I, and is exactly like mitosis. Centromeres of the chromosomes divide and 
individual chromatids now move to opposite poles. Following division of the cytoplasm, there are 
four cells – each with half the chromosome number of the original parent cell. (The four cells are said 
to be haploid.)
 ATL D2.1C 
This animation shows the process of meiosis: https://javalab.org/en/meiosis_en
Compare (look at similarities) and contrast (consider the differences) the details in this animation 
to those in Figure D2.1.10. Which details does the animation not include, and how would you 
change the animation to more accurately reflect the events of meiosis? 
Why is the first series of events in meiosis known as the ‘reduction division’? Look again at the 
animation and write a summary of what is happening to the number of chromosomes 
during meiosis.
Common 
mistake
Limited use of 
accurate and effective 
terminology is 
sometimes lacking 
in descriptions of 
meiosis, which 
restricts descriptions 
concerning, for 
example, the reduction 
division of meiosis. 
Accurate use of the 
words ‘homologous’, 
‘maternal’, ‘paternal’, 
‘diploid (2n)’, 
‘haploid (n)’, and 
‘random’ will help 
describe movement 
of chromosomes and 
how this results in 
genetic variety during 
reduction division and 
ensures better answers.
Concept: Continuity
Somatic body cells are diploid, containing pairs of homologous chromosomes. 
By producing haploid gametes, meiosis allows the number of chromosomes to be 
maintained from one generation to the next. A haploid male gamete fuses with a 
haploid female gamete at fertilization, forming a diploid zygote. Without the reduction 
division of meiosis, the number of chromosomes would double at each fertilization.
Nature of science: Observations
The discovery of meiosis
Meiosis was discovered by careful microscope examination of dividing germ-line cells. This was 
possible after the discovery of dyes that, when applied to tissues, specifically stained the contents of 
the nucleus. First, chromosomes were observed, described and named. Further careful studies then 
revealed the steps of mitosis and meiosis. The unravelling of the complexities of meiosis followed 
the observation of the doubling of the chromosome number at fertilization. Appreciation of a need 
for a reductive division preceded its discovery.
Germ-line cells are found in the gonads (testes and ovaries). Meiosis is part of the life cycle of every 
organism that reproduces sexually. In meiosis, four daughter cells are produced – each having half 
the number of chromosomes of the parent cell. Halving of the chromosome number of gametes is 
essential because at fertilization the number is doubled.
Down syndrome and non-disjunction
Very rarely, errors occur in the precisely controlled movements of the chromosomes during meiosis. 
The outcome is an alteration to part of the chromosome set. For example, chromosomes that should 
separate and move to opposite poles during the nuclear division of gamete formation fail to do so. 
Instead, a pair of chromosomes can move to the same pole. This malfunction event is referred to as 
non-disjunction. It results in some gametes with more than and some with less than the haploid 
number of chromosomes.
	
◆Non-disjunction: the 
failure of homologous 
chromosomes or sister 
chromatids to separate 
properly during meiosis.
Common 
mistake
A common 
misunderstanding is 
that non-disjunction 
can only happen 
if additional 
chromosomes are 
present rather than 
if one were missing. 
Non-disjunction can 
involve either the 
addition or reduction 
in the standard number 
of chromosomes.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
659
For example, people with Down syndrome have an extra chromosome 21, giving them a total of 
47 chromosomes. How this non-disjunction arises is illustrated in Figure D2.1.11. The symptoms of 
Down syndrome are variable but, when severe, they include congenital (hereditary) heart and eye 
defects. The incidence of all forms of chromosomal abnormalities increases significantly with age. 
People over the age of 40 who become pregnant are advised to have the chromosomes of the foetus 
assessed by screening.
Non-disjunction, resulting in trisomy (a condition in which an extra copy of a chromosome is 
present), does not only occur in chromosome 21. It can occur in chromosomes 18 and 13, as well as 
occasionally in other pairs of chromosomes.
Steps of non-disjunction in meiosis
(illustrated in nucleus with only two pairs
of homologous chromosomes – for clarity)
karyotype of a person with Down syndrome
meiosis I
meiosis II
homologous pairs
pulled to the same pole
germ cell at
start of meiosis
these cells will form 
gametes (egg cells 
or sperm) with an 
extra chromosome
these cells will form 
gametes short of
a chromosome
if the gametes formed
take part in fertilization
the zygote will have a
chromosome mutation
An extra chromosome causes Down syndrome.
The extra one comes from a meiosis error.The two
chromatids of chromosome 21 fail to separate,
and both go into the daughter cell that forms the
secondary oocyte.
an extra chromosome 21
 
■Figure D2.1.11 Down syndrome, an example of a non-disjunction
 ATL D2.1D 
Find out about other examples of congenital conditions resulting from trisomy in other 
chromosomes. Research and present your findings to the rest of your class. These sites are useful 
starting points:  
www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/health/conditionsandtreatments/trisomy-disorders  
www.nhs.uk/conditions/pataus-syndrome
	
◆Down syndrome: a 
congenital condition in 
which a person has an 
extra chromosome 21 as a 
result of non‑disjunction.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
660
Going further
Chromosome mutations are detected by karyotyping the chromosome set (see 
Chapter A3.1, page 111) of a foetus. The two methods for obtaining foetal cells are 
known as amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling. Both techniques carry a slight 
risk of miscarriages of the foetus, so they are only recommended in cases where there 
is significant likelihood of genetic defect. Parents must consent to the procedure.
The four haploid cells produced by meiosis differ genetically from each other for two reasons:
l	 There is crossing over of segments of individual maternal and paternal homologous 
chromosomes. These events result in new combinations of genes on the chromosomes of the 
haploid cells produced.
l	 There is random orientation (independent assortment) of maternal and paternal homologous 
chromosomes. This happens because the way the bivalents line up at the equator of the spindle 
in meiosis I is entirely random. Which chromosome of a given pair goes to which pole is 
unaffected by (independent of) the behaviour of the chromosomes in other pairs. 
 
■Crossing over
As the chromosomes thicken in the first stage of meiosis, homologous chromosomes come together 
in specific pairs all along their length. The product of each pairing is called a bivalent. 
The homologous chromosomes of the bivalents continue to shorten and thicken. Later in prophase, 
the individual chromosomes can be seen to be double-stranded, as the sister chromatids (of which 
each consists) become visible.
Within the bivalent, during the coiling and shortening process, breakages of the chromatids occur 
frequently. Breaks are common in non-sister chromatids, at the same points along their lengths. 
Broken ends rejoin more or less immediately but, where these ‘repairs’ are between non-sister 
chromatids, swapping of pieces of the chromatids occurs, hence the term ‘crossing over’.  
Once crossing over is complete, the non-sister chromatids continue to adhere at that point, called a 
chiasma (plural, chiasmata). The chiasma stabilizes the bivalent.
Virtually every pair of homologous chromosomes forms at least one chiasma at this time, and to have 
two or more chiasmata in the same bivalent is very common (Figure D2.1.12).
Chiasmata increase genetic variability because the process results in the exchange of DNA between 
maternal and paternal chromosomes. Remember, crossing over can occur many times and between 
different chromatids within each bivalent. So, crossing over can produce new combinations of alleles 
on the chromosomes of the haploid cells that are finally formed by meiosis, followed by cytokinesis.
	
◆Random 
orientation: refers to 
the way chromosomes line 
up in the centre (equator) 
of the cell during meiosis, 
with each chromosome 
of a given pair behaving 
independently to 
the chromosomes in 
other pairs. It results in 
each sperm and each 
egg having different 
combinations of 
chromosomes from the 
mother and father.
Top tip!
Non-disjunction, 
resulting in trisomy 
(a condition in which 
an extra copy of 
a chromosome is 
present), does not only 
occur in chromosome 
21. It can also occur in 
chromosome 13 and 
chromosome 18.
1 Homologous chromosomes 
commencing pairing to form a 
bivalent as they continue to 
shorten and thicken by coiling.
2 Breakages occur in parallel 
non-sister chromatids at 
identical points.
3 Rejoining of non-sister 
chromatids forms chiasmata.
4 Positions of chiasmata 
become visible later, as 
tight pairing of homologous 
chromosomes ends.
5 When homologous 
chromosomes move apart 
in anaphase I, crossing over 
becomes fully apparent.
 
■Figure D2.1.12 Formation of chiasmata 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
661
 
■Random orientation
The random orientation of chromosomes is illustrated in Figure D2.1.13 in a parent cell with a 
diploid number of four chromosomes. In human cells, the number of pairs of chromosomes is 23; 
the number of possible combinations of chromosomes that can be formed by random orientation 
during meiosis is 223, which is over 8 million. We see that random orientation alone generates a huge 
amount of variation in the coded information carried by different gametes into the fertilization stage. 
nucleus of parent cell
(diploid)
homologous
chromosomes
homologous
chromosomes
bivalents
In meiosis I the bivalents move
to the equator of the spindle
and line up randomly. Then,
when homologous chromosomes
separate they move to the 
nearest pole. This may occur…   …like this…
Random orientation is illustrated in a parent cell with two pairs of homologous chromosomes (four bivalents).
The more bivalents there are, the more variation is possible. In humans, for example, there are 23 pairs of 
chromosomes giving over 8 million combinations.
In meiosis II the ﬁnal
outcome is one of these
alternative combinations 
of four haploid cells.
bivalents
…like this
or
A
a
b
B
b
B
a
A
A
a
b
B
B
A
b
a
or
Here the resulting gametes
will be     AB,     ab.
B
A
b
a
B
A
b
a
B
A
b
a
1
2
1
2
Here the resulting gametes
will be     Ab,     aB.
1
2
1
2
 
■Figure D2.1.13 Genetic variation due to random orientation
In fertilization, the fusion of gametes from different parents then promotes genetic variation as well. 
Top tip!
The second stage of meiosis also results in an increase of variety, not just the first stage. Crossing 
over in meiosis I has led to non-identical chromatids in meiosis II. During meiosis II, the sister 
chromatids separate and are randomly distributed to the gametes. The outcome of which chromatid 
will go into which gamete is random, so that each gamete has a potentially unique combination of 
genetic material.
Concept: 
Change
Crossing over and 
random orientation 
during meiosis 
generates variation. 
Each gamete is 
different from every 
other gamete. These 
differences are a 
source of variation 
for evolution by 
natural selection.
6	 Explain how 
variation is 
generated during 
meiosis.
7	 Compare and 
contrast mitotic 
and meiotic cell 
division.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
662
Cell proliferation for growth, cell 
replacement and tissue repair
Both animals and plants grow from a single cell, the zygote, by repeated cell divisions to form an 
embryo. Proliferation for growth then occurs (i.e. rapid increase in number), which happens in 
animal early-stage embryos and in plant meristem tissue.
 
■Plant meristems
Once a plant has grown past the early embryo stage, all later growth of the plant occurs at restricted 
points in the plant, called meristems. A meristem is a group of cells that retain the ability to divide 
by mitosis. These cells are small, with thin cellulose walls and dense cytoplasmic contents. Vacuoles 
in the cytoplasm are mostly absent, marking them apart from typical mature plant cells (which have 
large, fluid-filled vacuoles). Meristems occur either at terminal growing points of stems and roots, or 
they are found laterally. In Figure D2.1.14, both types of meristem can be identified. 
terminal
bud – growing
point of stem
leaf blade of
two leaﬂets
leaf stalk
exposed cotyledons 
of seed
tap root system
lateral roots
leaf base expanded
into leaf-like ﬂaps
(stipules)
lateral bud
in axil of leaf
developing central
stele with procambial
strand cells
cell
enlargement
apical 
meristem
of root
root cap
(protects growing
root tip as it is pushed
through soil)
growing 
point of 
root
(×70)
stem in LS, showing 
vascular tissue 
(diagrammatic)
TS in region of
primary growth
TS in region of 
secondary growth
later, vegetative growth
switches to ﬂowering
and the capitulum with
ﬂowers is formed
secondary
phloem
secondary
xylem
epidermis
collenchyma
vascular
bundle
apical
meristem
pith
cortex
lateral
bud
procambial
strand
primary
phloem
crushed cortex
crushed cortex
primary
xylem
position
of the
cambium
ﬁrst step in
secondary
growth
ring (cylinder)
of cambium
formed –
lateral
meristem
 
■Figure D2.1.14 The roles of apical and lateral meristems in the growth of stems and roots
Apical meristems occur at the tips of the stem and root, and are responsible for their primary 
growth (Figure D2.1.14). Cell division and the subsequent growth of the cells produced here leads 
to the formation of stem (and root) tissue. First, the new cells formed by division rapidly increase in 
size. This cell enlargement phase is then followed by cell differentiation. 
Lateral meristems (Figure D2.1.14) form from the cambium cells (meristematic tissue – 
undifferentiated cells that are capable of indefinite division) in the centre of vascular bundles, 
between the (outer) phloem tissue and the (inner) xylem tissue. When the lateral meristem forms 
and grows, it causes the secondary growth of the plant, resulting in an increase in the girth of the 
stem. Growth of the lateral meristem increases the circumference and also the strength of the stem.
Table D2.1.1 compares the growth due to apical and lateral meristems.
	
◆Proliferation: 
increase in the number 
of cells as a result of cell 
growth and cell division.
	
◆Meristem: a group 
of cells in plants that 
retains the ability to 
divide by mitosis and 
form new cells and tissues 
throughout the life of 
a plant.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
663
 
■Table D2.1.1 Comparison of growth due to apical and lateral meristems
Growth due to apical meristem
Growth due to lateral meristem
occurs at tip of stems and roots
position of meristem
occurs laterally, between primary phloem 
and primary xylem
product of embryonic cells
origin
cambium – meristematic cells left over from 
primary growth
produces initial tissues of actively 
growing plant from the outset
timing of activity
functions in older stems (and roots), and in 
woody plants from the early development
produces growth in length and 
height of plant
outcome for stem
produces growth in girth of stem, plus 
strengthening of stem
 
■Early-stage animal embryos
Following fertilization, the zygote divides rapidly by mitosis to form a ball of cells (Figure D2.1.15). 
After approximately six days, a blastocyst has formed, from which the placenta develops and the 
main body of the organism. At this stage, all cells are undifferentiated, with the potential to become 
any type of cell and tissue in the body.
 
■Figure D2.1.15 Cell proliferation in the early-stage embryo of an animal
 
■Cell proliferation during routine cell replacement and 
wound healing
Cells in the body are constantly being worn out and need replacing. The average adult human loses 
approximately 500 million skin cells per day, and red blood cells at a rate of 2 million per second. 
Cell replacement is a routine process for all cell types (except those which cannot carry out mitosis, 
such as nerve cells, see page 467).
Cell proliferation is the process of generating an increased number of cells through cell division 
(mitosis). Because cells are regularly lost from the skin, routine cell replacement is needed. The outer 
layers of the skin epidermis are replaced many thousands of times during a lifetime. Stems cells in the 
basal (bottom) layer of the epidermis remain undifferentiated and continue dividing throughout life. 
8	 Define the term 
meristem.
Link
The development 
of unspecialized 
cells following 
fertilization is covered 
in Chapter B2.3, 
page 256.
	
◆Cell proliferation: 
the process of generating 
an increased number of 
cells through cell division 
(mitosis).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
664
Daughter cells of these cells differentiate and leave the basal layer. The process can be maintained 
because the basal cells are self-renewing.
Wound healing in the skin also involves cell proliferation. Following blood clotting (see 
Chapter C3.2, page 520), inflammation causes increased blood flow to the wound, enabling white 
blood cells (macrophages) and fibroblasts to travel rapidly to the damaged skin. The macrophages 
remove infection and the fibroblasts produce proteins that help wound closure (Figure D2.1.16).
blood clot
scab
ﬁbroblast
macrophage
blood vessel
ﬁbroblast proliferating
subcutaneous fat
freshly healed epidermis
freshly healed dermis
Fibroblasts proliferate to enable wound healing to occur rapidly. They break down the fibrin clot and 
create new extracellular matrix (ECM; made from collagen), that supports the other cells associated 
with effective wound healing as well as narrowing the wound.
Phases of the cell cycle
The cycle of growth and division of cells is called the cell cycle. Cell proliferation is achieved using 
the cell cycle. This cycle has three main stages (see Figure D2.1.17):
l	 interphase which includes G1, S and G2 phases (see Figure D2.1.17 for details of each)
l	 division of the nucleus by a process (mitosis) that results in two nuclei, each with an identical 
set of chromosomes
l	 division of the cytoplasm and whole cell (known as cytokinesis).
In fact, in each stage of the cell cycle particular events occur. These events are summarized in 
Figure D2.1.17, and they are also discussed below. Look at the subdivision of interphase now – distinctive 
features are identified in each stage.
length of cell cycle (time)
cell cycle
repeated
G2
S
M
C
cell cycle
prophase
metaphase
anaphase
telophase
cytokinesis (C)
•division of
cytoplasm
•two cells
formed
change in cell volume and quantity of DNA during a cell cycle
G1
volume of cell (arbitrary units)
quantity of DNA (arbitrary units)
mitosis
(M)
cell cycle
repeated
first phase of growth (G1)
• cytoplasm active
• new organelles formed
• intense biochemical activity
of growing cell
second phase of growth (G2)
• more growth of cell
• then preparation
for mitosis
synthesis of DNA (S)
• chromosomes copied (replicated)
     chromatids
 
■Figure D2.1.17 The stages of the cell cycle
 
■Figure D2.1.16 The 
process of wound healing
9	 Outline how skin 
repairs itself to 
heal a wound.
	
◆Cell cycle: repeating 
process of an orderly 
sequence of events where 
cells arise by the division 
of existing cells, grow, 
and then divide.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
665
 
■The steps of interphase
During the first phase of growth (G1), the synthesis of new organelles takes place in the cytoplasm. 
This is also a time of intense biochemical activity in the cytoplasm and organelles, and there is an 
accumulation of energy stores before nuclear division occurs again.
Next is a period of synthesis of DNA (S), when each chromosome makes a copy of itself. It is said 
to replicate. The two identical structures formed are called chromatids. The chromatids remain 
attached until they divide during mitosis.
Finally, there is a second phase of growth (G2), which is a continuation of the earlier time of intense 
biochemical activity and increase in amount of cytoplasm.
Cell growth during interphase
Interphase is always the longest part of the cell cycle, but it is of extremely variable length. 
When growth is fast, as in a developing human embryo and in the growing point of a young 
stem, interphase may last about 24 hours or less. On the other hand, in mature cells that divide 
infrequently, it lasts a very long period, for example in liver, bone, kidney and lung cells. Some cells, 
once they have differentiated, rarely or never divide again, such as brain cells. Here, the nucleus 
remains at interphase permanently.
 
■An overview of interphase
When the nucleus of a living cell at interphase is observed by light microscopy, the nucleus appears 
to be ‘resting’. This is not the case. Interphase is a metabolically active period and that growth 
involves the synthesis of cell components including proteins and DNA. The numbers of mitochondria 
and chloroplasts are also increased by growth and division of these organelles. During interphase, 
the chromosomes are actively involved in protein synthesis. From the chromosomes, copies of the 
information of particular genes or groups of genes (in the form of mRNA, page 616) are taken for use in 
the cytoplasm. It is in the ribosomes of the cytoplasm that proteins are assembled from amino acids, 
combined in sequences dictated by the information from the gene and relayed in the form of mRNA.
The distinctively compact chromosomes, visible during mitosis (Figure D2.1.8), become dispersed in 
interphase. They are now referred to as chromatin. Among the chromatin can be seen one or more 
dark-staining structures, known as nucleoli (singular, nucleolus). Chemically, the nucleoli consist of 
protein and RNA, and they are the site of synthesis of the ribosomes. These tiny organelles then 
migrate out into the cytoplasm.
Control of the cell cycle using cyclins
Look back at the stages of the cell cycle (Figure D2.1.17). Note that it consists of distinct phases, 
represented in shorthand as G1, S, G2, M and C.
The cell cycle is regulated by a molecular control system. The key points of this system are outlined 
below, best understood together with Figure D2.1.18.
l	 In the cell cycle there are key checkpoints where signals operate. These are stop points which 
have to be overridden.
l	 Three checkpoints are recognized – at G1, G2 and in M.
l	 At the G2 checkpoint, if the ‘go-ahead’ signal is received here, the cell goes through to M then C, 
for example.
l	 The molecular control signal substance in the cytoplasm of cells are proteins known as kinases 
and cyclins.
10	List the stages of 
the cell cycle.
11	State what 
structures of 
the interphase 
nucleus can be 
seen by electron 
microscopy.
	
◆Cyclin: regulatory 
protein whose 
concentration rises and 
falls at specific times 
during the eukaryotic 
cell cycle.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
666
l	 Kinases are enzymes that either activate or inactivate other proteins. Kinases are present in the 
cytoplasm all the time, though sometimes in an inactive state.
l	 Kinases are activated by specific cyclins, so they are referred to as cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs).
l	 Cyclin concentrations in the cytoplasm change constantly. As the concentration of cyclins 
increases, they combine with CDK molecules to form a complex that functions as a mitosis-
promoting factor (MPF) (Figure D2.1.18).
l	 As MPF accumulates, it triggers chromosome condensation, fragmentation of the nuclear 
membrane and, finally, spindle formation – that is, mitosis is switched on.
l	 By anaphase of mitosis, destruction of cyclins commences (but CDKs persist in the cytoplasm).
The concentration of different cyclins increases and decreases during the cell cycle, and there is a 
threshold level of a specific cyclin required to pass each checkpoint in the cycle. Figure D2.1.18 shows 
how the action of cyclin and CDK control cell division at the G2 checkpoint.
C
accumulated cyclin
molecules combine
with recycled CDK
to produce MPF
synthesis of fresh
cyclin begins in late S-phase
MPF triggers mitosis
– concentration of
MPF peaks in
metaphase
G2 checkpoint
G1
M
G2 
S
the cell cycle
cyclin
broken
down
CDK
MPF
 
■Figure D2.1.18 The molecular control system of the cell cycle: the role of 
kinase and cyclins in controlling mitosis at the G2 checkpoint
Nature of science: Observations
The accidental discovery of cyclins 
The discovery of the proteins that control the cell cycle came partly from work by Tim Hunt, as his 
team investigated protein synthesis more generally in the eggs of sea urchins. While the synthesis 
of most new proteins proceeded steadily, as anticipated, a minority of others went through short, 
abrupt cycles of increasing and decreasing concentration. High threshold levels of these individual 
proteins were found to correlate with changes in the cell cycle. By this means, and with the 
contributions of others (including from work on yeasts) the roles of four different proteins in the cell 
cycle were discovered. They were named cyclins at this stage.
In 2001, Paul Nurse, Tim Hunt and Leland Hartwell were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or 
Medicine for their contributions to the discovery of the control of the cell cycle. Tim Hunt makes 
clear that his discovery of cyclins was accidental in his Nobel Prize lecture, which you can access as a 
paper, or watch the video made at the ceremony:  
www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2001/hunt/lecture
The contributing studies of Paul Nurse were made on yeasts. The background of this scientist, a 
former President of The Royal Society, makes an interesting contrast with that of the others, and 
helpfully (and encouragingly) establishes how diverse the paths to a distinguished career in research 
can be: www.crick.ac.uk/research/find-a-researcher/paul-nurse
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Concept: 
Continuity
Each cell divides 
into two, which 
then themselves 
divide. The cell 
cycle is a repeating 
and continuous 
process that 
ensures the 
continuity of cells 
within an organism 
and between 
generations.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
667
Consequences of mutations in genes 
that control the cell cycle
In a healthy cell, the cell cycle is regulated by a molecular control system in which cyclins are 
involved (page 665). When mutations occur in genes that control the cell cycle, cancer can result 
because the normal controls of the cell cycle are absent.
Whatever the cause of a cancer, two types of genes play a part in initiating a cancer if they mutate: 
l	 Proto-oncogenes are genes that encode proteins that stimulate normal cell division. Mutations 
in proto-oncogenes converts them to oncogenes, which leads to increase in the amount of a 
proto-oncogene’s protein product or permanently activated proteins. This results in uncontrolled 
cell division, possibly leading to cancer. 
	
For example, the Ras gene codes for Ras protein, a G protein that relays a signal from a growth 
factor receptor on the cell surface membrane to a cascade of protein kinases, which leads to 
normal cell division. The Ras oncogene codes for a permanently activated Ras protein that 
triggers the kinase cascade in the absence of growth factor, resulting in uncontrolled cell division.
	
The mutation results in a dominant allele, and the effect of the normal allele is masked by the 
mutated allele. Only one allele of a gene needs to be mutated to have an effect.
l	 Tumour-suppressor genes encode for proteins that inhibit cell division or promote apoptosis 
(controlled cell death) if damaged DNA is being copied. Mutation of tumour-suppressor genes 
leads to no protein product, a decrease in the amount of protein product or permanently 
deactivated proteins. This will result in uncontrolled cell division, possibly leading to cancer. 
	
For example, the p53 gene codes for p53 protein, a transcription factor that promotes the 
synthesis of protein that triggers cell cycle arrest or promotes apoptosis when DNA damage is 
detected. The mutated p53 tumour-suppressor genes result in no p53 being produced. Cells 
with damaged DNA that are not supposed to proliferate will continue to divide, resulting in 
uncontrolled cell division. 
	
The mutation results in a recessive allele as the normal dominant allele encodes functional 
protein. Two alleles of a gene need to be mutated to have an effect.
Top tip!
When a proto-oncogene mutates it becomes a cancer-causing oncogene. The role of tumour-
suppressor genes is to prevent cancer – when they mutate they can lead to tumour formation.
Differences between tumours in 
rates of cell division and growth
 
■Cancer – diseases of uncontrolled cell division
There are many different forms of cancer, affecting different tissues of the body. Cancer is not 
thought of as a single disease. Today, in more economically developed countries, one in three 
people will suffer from cancer at some point in their life, and approximately one in four will die 
from it. In these regions, the most common cancers are of the lung in men and of the breast in 
women. However, in many parts of the world, cancer rates are different – often they are significantly 
lower. Biologists in laboratories throughout the world are carrying out research into the causes and 
treatment of cancer. You can see the range of common cancers and their incidences worldwide at the 
Global Cancer Observatory: https://gco.iarc.fr.
Link
G proteins and 
cascade of protein 
kinases are discussed 
in Chapter C2.1 
(HL only), page 459.
	
◆Proto-oncogene: 
gene that codes for 
proteins that stimulate the 
cell cycle and promote cell 
growth and proliferation.
	
◆Oncogene: a gene 
that, when activated, 
can potentially make a 
cell cancerous. Typically a 
mutant form of a normal 
gene (proto-oncogene) 
involved in the control of 
cell growth or division. 
	
◆Tumour-suppressor 
gene: a gene that in a 
normal tissue cell inhibits 
cancerous behaviour. Loss 
or inactivation of both 
copies of such a gene 
from a diploid cell can 
cause it to behave as a 
cancer cell.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
668
In all cancers, cells start to divide repeatedly by mitosis, without control or regulation. Where this 
occurs in the body, the rate of cell multiplication is much faster than the rate of cell death. 
An irregular mass of cells is formed, called a tumour (Figure D2.1.19). Some tumours are benign: 
these grow slowly and do not pass to other parts of the body. Other tumours are malignant, 
growing rapidly, destroying nearby normal tissues and spreading throughout the body. Benign 
tumours are non-cancerous whereas malignant tumours are cancerous.
malignant tumour cells
may have unusual
chromosomes and
their metabolism is
disabled
Normally dividing cells subjected
to prolonged exposure to
carcinogens.
tobacco smoke
ultraviolet light
asbestos
X-rays
The carcinogen causes
mutation in a cell.
mitosis
The mutated cell undergoes repeated,
rapid mitosis (the cell cycle is not
inhibited). The cells formed do not
respond to signals from other cells and
are not removed by the immune system.
rapid
mitosis
A benign tumour absorbs nutrients, enlarges,
may compress surrounding tissues, but
does not spread from its site of initiation. 
abnormal cells
(do not cause serious
problems and can
be removed by surgery)
rapid
mitosis
This step is possible
but not inevitable.
lymph
vessel
A malignant tumour consists of cells that
secrete signals triggering growth of blood and
lymph vessels to serve the tumour cells at the
expense of other tissues. Attachments to
other cells are lost and then malignant cells
may be carried around the body, setting up
secondary growths. The functions of invaded
organs are typically impaired or obstructed.
The spread of cancer cells to other 
locations is called metastasis.
This step is possible
but not inevitable.
blood
vessels
 
■Figure D2.1.19 Steps in the development of a malignant tumour
Sometimes tumour cells break away from the primary tumour and are carried to other parts of the 
body, where they form a secondary tumour. This process is known as a metastasis. Unchecked, 
cancerous cells ultimately take over the body at the expense of the surrounding healthy cells, leading 
to malfunction and death.
 
■Calculating the mitotic index
When observing a population of cells, we can determine its mitotic index. The mitotic index 
measures how many cells in a sample are in mitosis compared to the total number of cells. It is 
calculated in the following way:
(number of cells in mitosis ÷ total number of all cells) × 100
For example, Figure D2.1.20 shows a micrograph with cells, some of which are in mitosis.
12	Describe three 
environmental 
conditions that 
may cause normal 
cells to become 
cancerous cells.
13	Describe how 
the behaviour of 
cancerous cells 
differs from that of 
normal cells.
	
◆Benign tumour: a 
tumour that tends to 
grow slowly and does not 
spread to other parts of 
the body.
	
◆Malignant tumour: 
a tumour that grows 
rapidly, invades and 
destroys nearby normal 
tissues, and spreads 
throughout the body.
	
◆Primary tumour: a 
cancer growing at the 
site where the abnormal 
growth first occurred.
	
◆Secondary tumour: 
formed when cancerous 
cells detach from the 
primary tumour, penetrate 
the walls of lymph or 
blood vessels, and circulate 
around the body, causing 
tumours elsewhere.
	
◆Metastasis: the 
movement of cells from a 
primary tumour to set up 
secondary tumours.
14	Distinguish 
between a tumour 
and cancer.
	
◆Mitotic index: 
the number of cells 
undergoing mitosis divided 
by the total number of 
cells visible, which can also 
be shown as a percentage.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.1   Cell and nuclear division
669
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Counts
Micrographs can be used to perform counts, e.g. of cells in stages of mitosis. 
Repeated counts of objects in the field of view at high power illustrate the variability 
of biological material and the need for replicate trials.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Using basic arithmetic
To calculate the mitotic index, the number of cells visible in the micrograph is counted, and 
the number of cells undergoing mitosis. In the case of Figure D2.1.20:
l	 number of cells visible = 95
l	 number of cells undergoing mitosis = 10
So, the mitotic index = (
10
95) × 100 = 0.105 × 100 = 10.5%
For greatest accuracy, the mean of three or more samples of 100 cells should be used. This is important 
because the mitotic index is used to differentiate benign from malignant tumours (benign tumours 
have a lower mitotic index than malignant tumours) – a critical distinction. Tissue with a high mitotic 
index indicates a rapidly dividing cell mass – a possible indicator of tumour formation. The mitotic 
index can also be used to investigate the response to chemotherapy in most types of cancer (i.e. a 
reduction in the mitotic index indicates that treatment has been successful in reducing the cancer).
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What processes support the growth of organisms?
2	 How does the variation produced by sexual reproduction contribute to evolution?
 
■Figure D2.1.20 Cells in 
different stages of the cell 
cycle, including mitosis 
– this can be used to 
calculate the mitotic index
Common 
mistake
Sometimes the word 
‘tumour’ is used as 
an equivalent term to 
‘cancer’. This is not 
the case. Tumours 
are growths caused 
by uncontrolled cell 
division, but benign 
tumours do not cause 
cancer. Only malignant 
tumours are cancerous.
