HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
670
Gene expression
D2.2
•	 How is gene expression changed in a cell?
•	 How can patterns of gene expression be conserved through inheritance?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D2.2.1 	 Gene expression as the mechanism by which information in genes has effects on 
the phenotype (HL only)
	 D2.2.2 	 Regulation of transcription by proteins that bind to specific base sequences in 
DNA (HL only)
	 D2.2.3 	 Control of the degradation of mRNA as a means of regulating translation 
(HL only)
	 D2.2.4 	 Epigenesis as the development of patterns of differentiation in the cells of a 
multicellular organism (HL only)
	 D2.2.5 	 Differences between the genome, transcriptome and proteome of individual 
cells (HL only)
	 D2.2.6 	 Methylation of the promoter and histones in nucleosomes as examples of 
epigenetic tags (HL only)
	 D2.2.7 	 Epigenetic inheritance through heritable changes to gene expression (HL only)
	 D2.2.8 	 Examples of environmental effects on gene expression in cells and organisms 
(HL only)
	 D2.2.9 	 Consequences of removal of most but not all epigenetic tags from the human 
ovum and sperm (HL only)
	 D2.2.10 	Monozygotic twin studies (HL only)
	 D2.2.11 	External factors impacting the pattern of gene expression (HL only) 
Gene expression and its effect 
on the phenotype
Gene expression is the mechanism by which information in genes has effects on the phenotype. 
Information contained in the genetic code is transcribed into mRNA, which is in turn translated into 
proteins at ribosomes. The proteins produced by an organism determine its phenotype.
Gene expression is explored throughout this IB Biology course:
l	 Transcription is the first stage of gene expression and is a key stage where the expression of a 
gene can be switched on and off (Chapter D1.2). 
l	 The existence of non-coding sequences in DNA that do not code for polypeptides, and that these 
include regulators of gene expression, was introduced in page 626. 
l	 Different patterns of gene expression are the basis for cell differentiation, often triggered by 
changes in the environment (Chapter A2.2). 
l	 Biochemical gradients affect gene expression within an early-stage embryo (Chapter B2.3). 
	
◆Phenotype: 
observable traits of 
an organism resulting 
from genotype and 
environmental factors.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse the 
terms genotype and 
phenotype. Genotype 
refers to the ‘genetic 
makeup’ of an 
individual (the genetic 
information in the cell), 
whereas phenotype 
is the outward effect 
of the genotype on 
the body.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.2   Gene expression
671
l	 Intracellular receptors affect gene expression when a signalling chemical binds to it, causing the 
activated receptor to bind to specific DNA sequences to promote gene transcription (Chapter C2.1). 
l	 Auxin affects gene expression mechanisms operating in the nucleus, regulating growth and 
development in plants (Chapter C3.1). 
To summarize, the most common stages in gene expression are transcription, translation and the 
function of a protein product, such as an enzyme.
Concept: Continuity
The mechanism of gene expression ensures that the genetic code is transcribed into 
mRNA, which is in turn translated into proteins at ribosomes. The proteins produced by 
an organism determine its phenotype. There is therefore a continuity between genetic 
code and phenotype, maintained by gene expression.
Regulation of transcription by proteins that 
bind to specific base sequences in DNA
Transcription factors are proteins that bind to specific sequences of DNA to control transcription. 
Each transcription factor has a DNA-binding site that gives it the ability to bind to specific sequences 
of DNA called enhancer or promoter sequences. Enhancer sequences are regulatory sequences 
that, when bound by transcription factors, enhance the transcription of an associated gene. 
Regulatory sequences can be thousands of base pairs and are generally upstream from (i.e. before) 
the gene being transcribed, although they can also be downstream. Regulation of transcription is the 
most common form of gene control. The action of transcription factors allows for unique expression 
of each gene in different cell types and during development.
The definition and role of promoters in regulating transcription was discussed in Chapter D1.2 
(page 625). Promoter regions occur on DNA strands just before the start of a gene’s sequence of 
bases. Only when this transcription complex of proteins (enzyme plus factors) has been assembled, 
can transcription of the template strand of the gene begin. 
The rate of transcription may be increased (or decreased) by the binding of specific transcription 
factors on the enhancer site for the gene (Figure D1.1.7, page 612). This is at some distance prior to 
the promoter and gene sequence. However, when activator proteins bind to this enhancer site, a new 
complex is formed and makes contact with the polymerase–transcription factor complex. Then the 
rate of gene expression is increased.
Control of the degradation of mRNA as 
a means of regulating translation
mRNA molecules are synthesized during the process of transcription. From there, the mRNA is 
examined, modified and transported to ribosomes, before eventually being translated into proteins. 
mRNA is eventually broken down (degraded) by nucleases. In human cells, mRNA may exist 
for minutes or up to days. The 3′ poly-A tail (Chapter D1.2, page 628) must be degraded before 
the mRNA is broken down. When the mRNA is no longer being used for translation, poly-A tail 
shortening is one of the key steps initiating degradation of the mRNA. Degradation of mRNA 
ensures that proteins are synthesized only when they are needed, and that mRNA is removed once 
its job is done.
Common 
mistake
The relationship 
between gene 
expression and cell 
differentiation is 
sometimes not fully 
appreciated: genes are 
selected for expression 
to produce specific 
proteins needed by 
the cell.
	
◆Transcription factor: 
a protein that binds to 
specific DNA sequences to 
control the transcription 
of mRNA.
	
◆Enhancer: regulatory 
sequences on the DNA 
which increase the rate 
of transcription when 
activator proteins bind 
to them.
Concept: 
Change
Regulation by 
transcription factors 
determines which 
genes are encoded 
into proteins within 
the cell. In this way, 
the proteome of 
the cell can change 
according to the 
needs of the cell 
and its function.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
672
Epigenesis
Epigenesis refers to the development of an organism by differentiation from an undifferentiated 
zygote. It is the development of patterns of differentiation in the cells of a multicellular organism. 
As we have seen, this is determined by the genome of an organism and gene expression. Research 
has shown, however, that environmental factors can change the activity of the genes, and these 
changes can be passed on to offspring, thereby affecting their development.
Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the 
DNA base sequences (epi = outside). Examples of mechanisms that produce such changes are DNA 
methylation and histone modifications (see page 673, this chapter). Note that these modifications 
affect the way cells ‘read’ the genes, rather than alter the base sequences of DNA itself (which we 
would describe as a mutation).
The term phenotype refers to the characteristics or appearance of an organism. The phenotype is 
determined by the genotype (the genetic code of an organism). DNA base sequences are not altered 
by epigenetic changes, so the phenotype, but not the genotype, is altered. Later in this chapter 
(page 674), we will examine how epigenetic changes take place.
Differences between the genome, 
transcriptome and proteome of individual cells
As we saw in Chapter A2.2, the proteome of an organism refers to all the proteins expressed within a 
cell, tissue or organism at a certain time. Because the genome, the whole of the genetic information of 
an organism, is unique to each individual then the proteome it causes to be expressed is also unique. 
The genome is the same in all the cells of an organism because all cells in a multicellular organism 
are ultimately derived from one original cell by cell division. The genome instructs the expression 
of proteins. Because individual tissues have specific structures relating to their function, different 
proteins are expressed in each specific tissue cell type. For example, in the gut, specific organs 
synthesize digestive enzymes, whereas in bone and other skeletal structures, collagen is produced. 
No cell expresses all its genes; the process of gene expression determines which genes are switched 
on or off at any one time. It requires energy to express genes, so it is more efficient to turn on only 
the genes that are needed. It would waste energy to have all genes expressed at the same time when 
they are not required. Specific genes are therefore expressed (turned on or off) in different cells 
according to a required function. 
As the proteome is all the proteins produced by a cell, the proteome varies with the function, location 
or environmental conditions of the cell through the process of cell differentiation. This means that 
while the genome stays the same, the proteome varies and is dynamic due to gene expression.
genome
(~22000 genes)
transcriptome
(~200000 transcripts)
proteome
(>1 million proteins)
Pi
Pi
Pi
Pi
Pi
Pi
Pi
adenine
adenine
uracil
uracil
guanine
cytosine
guanine
alternative
promoters,
alternative
splicing,
mRNA
editing
post-translational
modifications
 
■Figure D2.2.1 The relationship between genome, transcriptome and proteome
	
◆Epigenesis: the 
development of patterns 
of differentiation 
in the cells of a 
multicellular organism.
	
◆Epigenetics: the 
study of heritable changes 
in gene activity that are 
not caused by changes in 
the DNA base sequences. 
Mechanisms that 
produce such changes 
are DNA methylation and 
histone modifications.
	
◆Genotype: the 
combination of alleles 
inherited by an organism.
1	 Outline how 
mRNA is degraded 
and why this is 
necessary.
2	 Describe how 
gene expression 
is controlled 
in eukaryotic 
organisms.
Top tip!
Proteomics is the 
study of the structure 
and function of the 
entire set of proteins 
of organisms.
Link
Cell differentiation 
and the development 
of specialized tissues 
in multicellular 
organisms (HL only) 
is covered in Chapter 
A2.2, page 85.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.2   Gene expression
673
The transcriptome is the range of mRNA transcripts produced in a specific cell or tissue type at a 
particular time. This depends of the differential expression of genes within a cell. As we saw in 
Chapter A2.2, the pattern of gene expression in a cell determines how it differentiates. The 
transcriptome will determine which proteins are synthesized within a cell, which in turn depends on 
which parts of the genome are activated via gene expression (see Figure D2.2.1).
Top tip!
Every individual has a unique proteome. Most, but not all, organisms assemble their proteins from 
the same amino acids, but the proteome of an organism is unique. This is because the genome, 
the whole of the genetic information of an organism, is unique to each individual (except in the 
example of monozygotic twins) and so the proteome it causes to be expressed is also unique.
Methylation of the promoter and 
histones in nucleosomes
Nucleosomes are stable protein–DNA complexes (page 26), but they are not static. For example, they 
can inhibit or facilitate transcription. Methylation is the reversible addition of a methyl group (–CH3) 
within the chromatin, sometimes to histone tails but usually to the DNA molecule itself at the 
promoter region. These are known as epigenetic tags. Enzymes bring about this addition to the base 
cytosine (Figure D2.2.2). The addition occurs while the DNA is wrapped around histone proteins.  
The effect is to change the activity of the gene – usually extensive methylation inactivates a gene, 
repressing transcription and therefore expression of the gene downstream. Removal of methyl groups 
may turn genes back on again. Methylation of amino acids in histones either enables or disables the 
recruitment of regulatory proteins to the chromatin, causing transcription to be repressed or activated.
methylation – a methyl group
has been added to cytosine
methyl group
DNA double helix
other sites where
methylation has
occurred
H
C
H
H
NH2
CH3
–O
–O
O
O
O
5-methylcytosine
how methylation
is brought about
C
C
C
C
N
N
O
NH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
cytosine
C
C
C
C
N
N
O
C
G
A
T
IIII
IIII
IIII
IIII
IIII
P
O–
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
IIII
IIII
G
C
IIII
IIII
IIII
	
◆Transcriptome: 
the range of mRNA 
transcripts produced in a 
specific cell or tissue type 
at a particular time. 
	
◆Methylation: the 
reversible addition of 
a methyl group (–CH3) 
within chromatin.
	
◆Epigenetic tag: 
chemical tags (such as 
methyl or acetyl groups) 
that are added directly 
to DNA or on to histone 
proteins to regulate gene 
expression, blocking 
or allowing access to a 
gene’s ‘on’ switch.
 
■Figure D2.2.2 Methylation of DNA
3	 Distinguish 
between genome, 
transcriptome and 
proteome.
Concept: 
Continuity and 
change
In contrast with 
the genome, which 
is characterized 
by its stability 
and continuity, 
the transcriptome 
actively changes. 
An organism’s 
transcriptome 
varies depending 
on many factors, 
including stage 
of development 
and environmental 
conditions.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
674
Once a gene has been methylated, it may remain in this condition. The methyl groups persist in situ 
from cell division to cell division. Furthermore, external conditions adverse to the cell or organism 
can leave their mark on our DNA through extensive methylations, leading to switched-off genes.
Top tip!
Cell differentiation and the regulation of gene expression allow proteins (e.g. insulin) to be produced in 
only certain types of body cell. When explaining these processes, chemical modification of DNA needs 
to be discussed, as well as the role of non-coding sequences in the regulation of gene expression.
Epigenetic inheritance through heritable 
changes to gene expression
Epigenetic inheritance is the acquisition of characteristics gained by a parent in their lifetime and 
passed on to their offspring. It comes about by modification of chromatin via epigenetic tags, such as 
DNA methylation or histone modification. Phenotypic changes in a cell or organism can therefore be 
passed on to daughter cells or offspring without changes in the nucleotide sequence of DNA. It can 
occur if epigenetic tags remain in place during mitosis or meiosis. If the tags are removed during cell 
division, epigenetic inheritance will not take place.
Nature of science: Patterns and trends
It now appears that, not only does methylation last a lifetime, it can be, and often is, transmitted to 
offspring – and sometimes to further generations. The environment of a cell and an organism may 
have an impact on gene expression for generations.
In 1944, communities in the western Netherlands were deprived of food supplies as a result of 
wartime hostilities for over six months. Many people died of extreme starvation, but among the 
survivors were pregnant mothers who gave birth. Although these babies born after the famine were 
underweight initially and were fed normally after the war was over, they ended up heavier than 
average as adults and suffered from higher rates of obesity. It seems the parents’ starvation was 
imprinted on their children’s DNA, where as a survival strategy children developed a heavier mass 
than normal. 
From the time Mendel deduced the existence of ‘factors’ (page 726), through to Crick and Watson’s 
discovery of the nature of the gene in chemical terms (page 20), genes and alleles were seen 
as unchangeable by external factors. The effects of environmental change were believed to be 
restricted to which genes (alleles) survived and contributed to the gene pool of future generations. 
The environment’s impact was held to be on selection, not gene performance. Today, it seems 
poor diets (for example) can interfere with the performance of genes in succeeding generations, 
presumably as a result of ‘markers’ attached to parent DNA in earlier times.
Information based on www.nytimes.com/2018/01/31/science/dutch-famine-genes.
html and https://theanalyticalscientist.com/fields-applications/a-lasting-legacy
Examples of environmental effects on 
gene expression in cells and organisms
Many external factors can affect gene expression, such as diet, oxygen levels, humidity, light cycles, 
drugs, temperature and exposure to mutagens. Here, we will explore the effect of air pollution on 
gene expression.
Top tip!
The promoter is an 
example of a length of 
non-coding DNA with 
a special function.
	
◆Epigenetic 
inheritance: an 
inheritance pattern in 
which a modification 
to chromatin alters 
gene expression in an 
organism; a parent’s 
experiences, in the form 
of epigenetic tags, can be 
passed down to offspring.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.2   Gene expression
675
Air pollution caused by traffic includes particulate matter (small particles produced by diesel 
vehicles that can enter lung tissue and cause damage), ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO) and 
nitrogen oxides (NOx). Air pollution has numerous harmful effects on health and contributes to 
the development of cardiovascular disease and a number of lung conditions, including asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Recent research indicates that exposure to air 
pollution can modify DNA and histone methylation patterns, and that these changes might in turn 
affect inflammation and the development of diseases.
Exposure to air pollution has been correlated with long-term negative respiratory health outcomes, 
including the development of lung diseases. Interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) is an overall term for 
diseases that cause inflammation of tissues within the lung, including the bronchioles, alveoli and 
the capillaries surrounding the alveoli, leading to scarring and thickening of tissue. In the alveoli, 
thickening of tissue can lead to decreased rates of oxygen diffusion into the blood. Inflammation of 
the bronchioles causes asthma. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), one of the most common forms 
of ILD, is triggered by the inhalation of organic and inorganic substances from, for example, air 
pollution. These pollutants influence HP development through epigenetic modifications.
Treatments, such as exercise and B vitamins, have been suggested as solutions to reduce the impact 
of air pollution on methylation patterns and health.
Consequences of removal of most 
but not all epigenetic tags from 
the human ovum and sperm
Many organisms retain and pass on epigenetic marks from environmental exposure via gametes. 
This means that the epigenetic tags can be passed on to the next generation. In humans and other 
mammals, egg and sperm cells undergo extensive reprogramming during development, which removes 
nearly all epigenetic marks (the epigenetic tags are said to be ‘silenced’). Any tag that is not removed 
may affect the development and function of subsequent generations, as we have seen earlier (page 674). 
Research has suggested that one of the important purposes of epigenetic reprogramming in human 
sperm and egg cells is to remove epigenetic changes that might be caused by the environment. The 
mechanism evolved to prevent changes in methylation patterns caused by environmental disturbances 
from being transmitted across generations. For a small minority of genes (approximately 1%), however, 
epigenetic tags survive this process and pass unchanged from parent to offspring, through a process 
known as imprinting. Imprinting is a process where the DNA in sperm and eggs are modified during 
gametogenesis (i.e. during the formation of gametes by meiosis). This involved the addition of epigenetic 
tags that can switch ‘on’ parts of the DNA and switch ‘off’ other parts. 
Different genes are epigenetically silenced in eggs and sperm. For most genes, two working copies are 
inherited, one from each parent. With imprinted genes, only one working copy is inherited, due to 
the differential silencing of epigenetic tags in sperm and egg development. Depending on the gene, 
either the copy from mother or the copy from father is epigenetically silenced. In sperm development, 
maternal tags are silenced and in egg development, paternal tags are silenced. 
 
■Imprinting in tigons and ligers
Tigons and ligers are both lion–tiger hybrids produced by interbreeding lions and tigers. Crossing a 
male tiger with a female lion produces a tigon, which is about the same size or smaller than either 
parent. However, the cross between a female tiger and a male lion produces a liger, which is known 
for its great size as it is bigger than both lions and tigers. 
Link
The adaptations of 
mammalian lungs 
for gas exchange is 
covered in Chapter 
B3.1, page 277.
4	 Outline the role 
of methylation 
in epigenetic 
inheritance.
	
◆Imprinting: process 
by which only one copy 
of a gene in an individual 
(either from their 
mother or their father) 
is expressed, while the 
other copy is suppressed. 
Gene expression is 
silenced by the epigenetic 
addition of chemical tags 
to the DNA during egg or 
sperm formation.
5	 Explain why 
most epigenetic 
tags are removed 
from human ovum 
and sperm.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse 
genetic imprinting 
with a different type 
of imprinting you 
may have read about, 
for example animal 
imprinting, where 
young birds follow 
their mother.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
676
The differences can be accounted for by genetic imprinting: tigers and lions imprint their DNA 
differently. It is possible these differences have evolved because of the different reproductive habitats 
and lifestyles of the two species. Female lions may mate with multiple males, so a male lion passes 
on genes that encourage growth in his own cubs in that litter. In contrast, the female lion has 
evolved imprinted genes that are anti-growth (Figure D2.2.3), because she is equally related to 
all the potential cubs and so wants to equally distribute resources to maximize the number who 
might survive. 
Tigers have a different social structure to lions and are not subject to the same pressures. A female tiger 
mates with one male, who is equally related to all the cubs. His genes would not want to ‘encourage’ 
growth because there is no competition between cubs from the male’s perspective. The female tiger 
does not therefore need to evolve anti-growth imprinting ‘defences’. If a female tiger, with no imprinted 
defences against paternally inherited genes encouraging growth in her offspring, is crossed (i.e. bred) 
with a male lion, who will contribute genes that encourage growth, a liger is produced (Figure D2.2.3). 
Growth in the liger is therefore a consequence of different patterns of epigenetic and genetic 
inheritance in lions and tigers. This shows how the phenotypic differences in tigons and ligers have an 
epigenetic origin, although the exact genes that are imprinted in lions or tigers, or which of these genes 
make the biggest differences in terms of growth, are not currently known.
growth gene
on!
growth gene
on!
growth gene
off!
growth gene
off!
growth gene
on
growth gene
on
growth gene
on
growth gene
on
tigon
(same size or smaller than parents)
liger
>400kg
female lion
120–80kg
male tiger
160–230kg
male lion
170–230kg
female tiger
140–80kg
x
x
 
■Figure D2.2.3 Different patterns of epigenetic inheritance in lions and tigers explains different phenotypes in ligers and tigons
 ATL D2.2A 
Read more about how epigenetic tags can be inherited, and the role of imprinting, using 
these websites:  
https://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/epigenetics/inheritance 
https://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/epigenetics/imprinting
Write an essay explaining how hybrid animals can be used to understand the role of epigenetic 
inheritance in the determination of phenotypic traits.
6	 Define the 
term epigenetic 
inheritance.
7	 Outline the effect 
of epigenetic tags 
remaining in sperm 
and eggs. 
Top tip!
You can read more 
about tigons and ligers, 
and other examples 
of genetic imprinting, 
here: www.thetech.
org/ask-a-geneticist/
why-are-ligers-so-big


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.2   Gene expression
677
Monozygotic twin studies
Within families there are remarkable similarities between parents and their offspring, but no two 
members of a family are identical, apart from identical twins.
Differences can be due to:
l	 genetic factors: some differences may be controlled by genes – such as human blood groups
l	 environmental factors: other differences between individuals may be due to the effect of our 
environment, such as a suntan acquired from exposure to the Sun
l	 a combination of genetic and environmental factors: other differences between individuals 
may be due to both genetics and environment, such as our body height and weight.
You may have heard the question ‘nature or nurture?’ This refers to the origin of phenotypic variation: 
whether it is due to the genetic code of an individual (‘nature’) or the environment they were brought 
up in (‘nurture’). Studies using monozygotic twins attempt to answer this question and are designed 
to measure the contribution of genetics, as opposed to the environment, for a given trait.
Identical twins are monozygotic, meaning that they come from the same dividing cell, so are 
genetically identical. They cannot be distinguished by DNA fingerprinting. This contrasts with 
dizygotic twins, which are non-identical (i.e. may be a male and a female) because they develop from 
two separate fertilized eggs (Figure D2.2.4). Because non-identical twins come from two different 
egg cells, each one with a different combination of alleles, fingerprinting techniques are able to find 
differences between them.
monozygotic
dizygotic
shared
placenta
genetically
identical
zygote splits
separate
placenta
genetically
distinct
 
■Figure D2.2.4 Comparing monozygotic (identical) and dizygotic (non-identical) twins 
Studies can compare twins that have been brought up together or separately. Measurements of 
specific phenotypic traits can be measured and variation attributed to genotype or the environment 
(or possibly a combination of both). If separated twins show similar characteristics then the cause of 
the trait is probably genetic, whereas if there are significant differences then it is probably due to 
the environment.
	
◆Monozygotic twins: 
identical twins result from 
the fertilization of a single 
egg by a single sperm, 
with the fertilized egg 
then splitting into two. 
Identical twins share the 
same genomes and are 
always of the same sex.
	
◆Monozygotic: 
derived from a single 
ovum, and so genetically 
identical.
Common 
mistake
Do not just refer to 
‘twins’ when referring 
to siblings born at 
the same time – 
refer to the specific 
type of twin, i.e., 
either monozygotic 
(developed from 
the same zygote) or 
dizygotic (developed 
from two different 
zygotes) twins.
8	 Describe the role 
of monozygotic 
twin studies.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
678
In twin studies, results for monozygotic twins can be compared to those for dizygotic twins. 
In these investigations, many pairs of twins are studied to gather an accurate estimate of the 
relative importance of genes and the environment. Monozygotic twins share all their genes and 
so differences between twins can therefore be due to non-shared environmental influences. If 
both monozygotic and dizygotic twins resemble each other closely, this must be due to shared 
environmental influences. If monozygotic twins resemble each other more closely than dizygotic 
twins, then it suggests that genetic factors may play a role. Although monozygotic twins share the 
same genotype, most monozygotic twins are not identical. They may have differences in physical 
features and predisposition to disease, for example. One explanation for these observations are 
epigenetic changes, due to differences in DNA methylation and histone acetylation over the lifetime 
of the twins. Methylation levels can be expected to increase with age.
One twin study, carried out by geneticist Claude Bouchard in 1990 and published in The New 
England Journal of Medicine, examined the importance of genes for body-fat storage and the 
development of obesity. Bouchard gave male monozygotic twins excess calories (an additional 
1000 calories a day) for three months. Every participant was heavier by the end of the experiment, 
although weight gain within pairs of twins was much more similar than weight gain between 
different twin pairs. Twins in each pair tended to gain weight in the same parts of the body, 
suggesting that genetic factors are involved. You can read more about this study here:  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2336074
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Exploring; designing
If you were designing a monozygotic twin study, which phenotypic aspect would you 
study? What ethical issues would you have to address? Consult a variety of sources and 
from these select sufficient and relevant sources of information.
Formulate a research question and hypothesis for the monozygotic twin study you 
have proposed. Be sure to state and explain your predictions using your scientific 
understanding, and identify and justify your dependent, independent and control 
variables. Justify the range and quantity of measurements in your investigation. 
Refer back to the investigations of twin studies you have read about in research papers. 
How does your hypothesis, prediction and methodology compare to these studies?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
External factors impacting the 
pattern of gene expression
Factors from outside the cell can affect gene expression. For example, both hormones and 
biochemical factors can impact the pattern of gene expression. 
 
■The effect of a hormone
We have seen in Chapter C2.1 how steroid hormones oestradiol, progesterone and testosterone can 
affect gene expression (page 465). In each case, the hormone binds to receptors in the cytoplasm, 
which act as ligand-gated transcription factors that in turn bind to DNA, with the help of co-
activators and co-repressors, to alter DNA transcription.
 ATL D2.2B 
Identical genes in 
monozygotic twins may 
be expressed differently 
due to epigenetic 
changes – differences 
in methylation 
patterns influenced 
by the environment. 
Read the following 
research paper, which 
investigates changes in 
levels of methylation 
between 3-year-old 
twins and 50-year-old 
twins: https://www.
pnas.org/doi/10.1073/
pnas.0500398102 
Summarize the findings 
of the study. What 
conclusions do you 
deduce from the 
methylation patterns 
seen in the two sets 
of twins? 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.2   Gene expression
679
 
■The effect of lactose in bacteria
In bacteria, control of gene expression occurs most commonly at the level of transcription, which 
means that bacteria regulate how much mRNA is made from most genes. A second way for bacteria 
to regulate gene expression is to control the rate at which mRNA is translated into protein, that is, 
translational level of control. 
In prokaryotes, operons are regions of DNA that contain a group of closely related genes consisting 
of structural genes and regulating elements. The regulatory sequences (non-coding DNA regions) 
include a promoter, operator and terminator. Structural genes encode the enzymes of a metabolic 
pathway. The operator position is important as its regulation enables or prevents the transcription of 
genes into mRNA. 
The bacterium E. coli can be found in the human gut. Lactose is available to E. coli when we drink 
milk. Lactose metabolism begins with its hydrolysis into monosaccharides. By producing the 
appropriate enzymes only when the nutrient is available, the E. coli cell avoids wasting energy and 
resources making proteins that are not needed. It is the lac operon (lactose operon) that ensures 
that the E. coli cell only produces the enzymes required to metabolize lactose when lactose is present. 
The process is illustrated in Figure D2.2.5.
This mechanism involves a repressor molecule (coded for by a regulator gene), an operator gene 
situated close to the gene that is being regulated (a structural gene, in this case coding for the 
lactose-metabolizing enzyme), and a promoter gene. When there is no lactose, the repressor 
molecule binds to the operator and prevents transcription of the structural gene that codes for the 
lactose-metabolizing enzyme. If lactose is present, the lactose molecule reacts with the regulator 
protein, preventing it from binding with the operator gene. The lactose-metabolizing gene can then 
be transcribed and lactose metabolized by the cell. When all the lactose has been metabolized and it 
is no longer present, the repressor molecule blocks transcription again. 
In the presence of the substrate lactose:
In the absence of the substrate lactose:
lactose
repressor
RNA polymerase
promoter
operator
gene for lactase
The gene is turned on.
The gene is turned off.
1 Lactose has combined with the 
repressor and inhibited its action.
 
2 RNA polymerase has bound to the
promoter and is about to express the
structural gene for lactase. mRNA for
lactase synthesis will be transcribed
and pass straight to ribosomes in the
surrounding cytoplasm, where lactase
is synthesized. 
3 Eventually, all the lactose will have
been metabolized, and the repressor
will be free to bind to the operator 
again. 
1 There is no lactose to combine with
the repressor.
 
2 The repressor binds with the operator. 
3 The RNA polymerase is obstructed
from binding to the promoter.
 
■Figure D2.2.5 The function of the lac operon in bacteria
The lac operon is an inducible operon. Transcription is turned on by the presence of a small effector 
molecule called the inducer, in this case, lactose. The ability of the repressor to bind the operator 
and inhibit transcription depends on the protein’s conformation, which is allosterically regulated 
by an inducer. Thus, the concentration of the inducer determines the activity of the operon.
	
◆Operon: sequence 
of adjacent bacterial 
genes all under the 
transcriptional control of 
the same operator.
	
◆Operator: a DNA 
region at one end of 
an operon that acts as 
the binding site for a 
repressor protein. When 
the operator is complexed 
with the repressor, 
transcription is prevented.
	
◆Lac operon: an 
inducible operon 
including three loci 
involved in the uptake 
and breakdown of lactose 
in the bacterium E. coli.
	
◆Repressor: the protein 
product of a regulator 
gene that acts to control 
transcription of an operon. 
The repressor binds to 
the operator and prevents 
transcription by RNA 
polymerase of an operon.
	
◆Inducer: a molecule 
that is capable of 
activating the transcription 
of a gene by combining 
with and inactivating a 
genetic repressor.
Top tip!
Operons are only found 
in prokaryotes (bacteria 
and cyanobacteria). 
The regulator-gene 
mechanisms in 
eukaryotes are more 
complicated.
Link
The definition of 
allosteric regulators 
and more details 
about them is 
in Chapter C1.1, 
page 399.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
680
Top tip!
The lac operon is an inducible operon. Its transcription is usually switched off but can be turned on 
when a specific small inducer molecule (lactose) binds allosterically and inactivates the repressor. 
In the absence of lactose or when lactose concentration is low:
l	 no lactose binds to the lac repressor
l	 the lac repressor binds to the operator site and blocks RNA polymerase from transcribing the 
structural genes, thus inhibiting transcription.
9	 Suggest why 
operons are 
necessary in 
bacteria.
 
■The effect of tryptophan in bacteria
E. coli synthesizes tryptophan (an amino acid) from a precursor molecule in a series of metabolic 
steps, each catalysed by a specific enzyme. The five coding regions for the tryptophan enzymes that 
synthesize tryptophan are arranged sequentially (starting with trpE) on the chromosome in the 
operon (Figure D2.2.6). When E. coli needs to make tryptophan for itself because it lacks the amino 
acid, all the enzymes in the metabolic pathway are synthesized at one time.
The trp operon is a repressible operon because its transcription is usually turned on but can 
be inhibited (repressed) when a specific small molecule (tryptophan) binds allosterically (see 
Chapter C1.1) to a regulatory protein.
l	 The trp repressor is the product of a regulatory gene called trpR, which is located some distance 
away from the operon it controls, and it has its own promoter. 
l	 The trp repressor is synthesised in an inactive form with little affinity for the trp operator. 
l	 Only if tryptophan binds to the trp repressor does the repressor protein change to the active form 
that can bind to the operator, inhibiting transcription of the structural genes.
in the presence of the substrate tryptophan:
in the absence of the substrate tryptophan:
RNA polymerase
promoter
operator
tryptophan
repressor
trpE
trpD
trpC
trpB
trpA
mRNA synthesis is blocked
mRNA synthesis can proceed
RNA polymerase
promoter
operator
repressor
trpE
trpD
trpC
trpB
trpA
 
■Figure D2.2.6 The function of the trp operon
Tryptophan functions as a co-repressor (as opposed to lactose acting as the inducer in lac operon) 
that cooperates with a repressor protein to switch an operon off. As more tryptophan accumulates, 
more tryptophan molecules can then bind to the trp repressor, which can then bind to the trp 
operator and inhibit the synthesis enzymes involved in the tryptophan biosynthetic pathway.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What mechanisms 
are there for 
inhibition in 
biological systems?
2	 In what ways does 
the environment 
stimulate 
diversification? 
