D2.3   Water potential
681
Water potential
D2.3
•	 What factors affect the movement of water into or out of the cell?
•	 How do plant and animal cells differ in their regulation of water movement?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D2.3.1 	 Solvation with water as the solvent
	 D2.3.2 	 Water movement from less concentrated to more concentrated solutions
	 D2.3.3 	 Water movement by osmosis into or out of cells
	 D2.3.4 	 Changes due to water movement in plant tissue bathed in hypotonic and 
hypertonic solutions
	 D2.3.5 	 Effects of water movement on cells that lack a cell wall
	 D2.3.6 	 Effects of water movement on cells with a cell wall
	 D2.3.7 	 Medical applications of isotonic solutions
	 D2.3.8 	 Water potential as the potential energy of water per unit volume (HL only)
	 D2.3.9 	 Movement of water from higher to lower water potential (HL only)
	 D2.3.10 	Contributions of solute potential and pressure potential to the water potential 
of cells with walls (HL only)
	 D2.3.11 	Water potential and water movements in plant tissue (HL only)
Solvation with water as the solvent
Solvation is the interaction of a solvent with the molecules and ions that dissolve in it (the solute). 
As seen in Chapter A1.1, water is an ideal solvent because of its polarity, where the hydrogen ends of 
the V-shaped molecule are positive and the oxygen end is negative. Water molecules can therefore 
interact with the positive and negative charges of the solute and form hydrogen bonds, or ion-dipole 
forces (if ions), between the two. Solvent polarity is the most important factor in determining how 
well the solvent solvates a particular solute. Polar solvent molecules can solvate polar solutes and ions 
because they can orient the appropriate partially charged portion of the molecule towards the solute 
through hydrogen bonding or ion-dipole forces (Figure D2.3.1). This stabilizes the system and 
creates a hydration shell around each particle of solute (Figure A1.1.9, page 8).
	
◆Solvation: the 
interaction of a solvent 
with dissolved molecules 
or ions.
undissolved sodium chloride
ion-dipole forces
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
−
+ +
−+
+
+
+
−
−
−
−
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
Na+
Na+
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
Na+
Na+
l−
Na+
Na+
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
Na+
Na+
l−
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
Cl−
l−
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
+
+
water
molecules
chloride ion (–ve)
attracts +ve pole
of water
sodium ion (+ve)
attracts –ve pole
of water
a+
 
■Figure D2.3.1 Solvation of a salt solute 
(sodium chloride) in a solvent (water)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
682
Water movement from less concentrated 
to more concentrated solutions
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion involving water molecules. Because water is an important 
component of cells, the diffusion of water is referred to specifically as ‘osmosis’. Water, although 
polar, is small enough to move through the phospholipids of the bilayer, although it also moves 
through special pore proteins called aquaporins (page 228). Osmosis is the net (i.e. overall) 
movement of water molecules from a less concentrated solution (i.e. more dilute) to a region of more 
concentrated solution, across a selectively permeable membrane. Osmosis is therefore the passive 
movement of water molecules across a partially permeable membrane, from a region of lower solute 
concentration to a region of higher solute concentration (Figure D2.3.2).
water molecules
membrane
solute molecules
dilute solution
concentrated solution
low concentration of solute
high concentration of solute
net movement of water
 
■Figure D2.3.2 Water moves by osmosis from a less concentrated to a more concentrated solution
Figure D2.3.3 shows three different concentrations of a solution outside a cell. If the solution outside 
the cell (i.e. below the membrane in Figure D2.2.3) is more dilute than the cytoplasm inside the cell, 
it is referred to as hypotonic. This means that the external solution is less concentrated than the cell 
cytoplasm. In these conditions, there will be a net inflow of water into the cell by osmosis. If the 
solution outside the cell is more concentrated than the cytoplasm inside the cell, the solution is said 
to be hypertonic. This means there will be a net outflow of water from the cell by osmosis. If the 
solute concentration is the same on both sides of a membrane (i.e. inside the cell and in the external 
solution), the external solution is said to be isotonic, and there is no net entry or exit of water from 
the cell by osmosis.
a Hypotonicity
cytoplasm
outside the cell
b Isotonicity
cytoplasm
outside the cell
c Hypertonicity
cytoplasm
outside the cell
water
solute
aquaporin
membrane
 
■Figure D2.3.3 Flow of water into or out from a cell depends on the osmotic concentration
Link
The definition of 
osmosis is on page 
227. The movement 
of water molecules 
across membranes by 
osmosis and the role 
of aquaporins starts 
on Chapter B2.1, 
page 228.
	
◆Hypotonic: when the 
external solution is less 
concentrated than the cell 
cytoplasm and there is a 
net inflow of water into 
the cell by osmosis.
	
◆Hypertonic: when the 
external solution is more 
concentrated than the cell 
cytoplasm and there is a 
net outflow of water from 
the cell by osmosis.
	
◆Isotonic: when the 
external solution is the 
same concentration as the 
cell cytoplasm and there 
is no net entry or exit of 
water from the cell by 
osmosis.
Common 
mistake
It is incorrect to refer to 
water as ‘osmosising’. 
There is no verb ‘to 
osmosis’. The correct 
terminology is to 
say ‘water moves by 
osmosis’.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.3   Water potential
683
Top tip!
A way to remember the difference between hypertonic and hypotonic is that in a hypotonic 
solution, the solute concentration is lower than the cell cytoplasm, whereas in a hypertonic solution 
the solute has a higher solute concentration than the cell cytoplasm; i.e. hypo = low (in terms of 
solute concentration) and hyper = high.
Water movement by osmosis into or out of cells
The direction of the net movement of water can be predicted depending on whether the external 
solution surrounding a cell is hypotonic or hypertonic. In Figure D2.3.3, the area below the plasma 
membrane represents the solution outside the cell, the area above the membrane is the cytoplasm. 
In an isotonic solution, there is no net movement of water because solute concentration is the same 
on both sides of the membrane. The condition in an isotonic solution is said to be in dynamic 
equilibrium, which means that although water moves across the membrane (i.e. the situation is 
dynamic) there is no overall change in water concentration on either side of the membrane (i.e. the 
situation is at equilibrium). 
Concept: Continuity
Water moves into and out of cells by osmosis. In this way cells can maintain their osmotic 
concentration. This is important in animal cells, where the internal environment needs to 
be the same as the external environment to avoid cell lysis (bursting) or shrinkage.
Changes in plant tissue bathed in 
hypotonic and hypertonic solutions
 
■Estimation of osmotic concentration of plant tissue
When plant cells are bathed in a solution that is isotonic with the cell cytoplasm, there is no net 
entry or exit of water from the cells. The tissue retains the same dimensions and mass. Alternatively, 
if similar plant tissue is placed in a hypertonic solution, the tissue decreases in dimensions and 
mass. When placed in a hypotonic solution, it increases in dimensions and mass. This observation is 
the basis of the experiment illustrated in Figure D2.3.4. Here the aim is to discover the concentration 
of the bathing solution isotonic with the cells of potato tuber.
Study the sequence of steps involved in the experiment. Note the importance of:
l	 accurate weighing out of the solute (sucrose in this case)
l	 accurate pipetting of solution from tube to tube in the process of serial dilution
l	 the use of replicate samples of tissue in each tube
l	 the accurate measurement of the length of the tissue strips at the end of the experiment.
Examine the graph to identify what molar concentration of sucrose is isotonic with the cytosol of the 
potato tissue used in this experiment.
Common 
mistake
It is incorrect to 
say that there is no 
movement of water in 
an isotonic solution. 
There is movement 
of water across the 
membrane, but the 
movement out from 
the cell is balanced by 
movement into the cell, 
i.e. there is dynamic 
equilibrium, and so no 
net osmosis.
1	 State the 
significance of 
the use of three 
tissue strips in each 
of the tubes in 
Figure D2.3.4.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
684
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.4
mol dm–3 solution
initial length/ﬁnal length of
tissue strip samples
0.6
0.8
2 Preparing the tissue strips and the setting up of the experiment
replicate strip (10 × 1 × 0.5 cm) or cylinders (10 × 1 cm 
cork borer) cut from a large potato tube 
tissue strips/cylinders washed and three placed in each tube
After a period of 30 minutes the tissue strips were retrieved, blotted dry, and their lengths 
measured accurately. The mean change in length of the three strips in each tube was calculated.
A graph of the results was plotted: The relationship between the molar concentration of 
sucrose solutions and the change in length of tissue strips
3 Measuring the ﬁnal lengths of the tissue strips
4 Graphing the results and estimating the osmotic concentration of potato tuber tissue
10 cm
1 Preparing different concentrations of sucrose solution, 0.8 mol dm−3 Æ 0.2 mol dm−3
100 cm3 of 1 mol dm−3 solution was taken and the following dilutions carried out:
Volume of distilled water (cm3)
Volume of
1 mol dm−3
sucrose (cm3)
Concentration of
sucrose (mol dm−3)
2
8
0.8
4
6
0.6
6
4
0.4
8
2
0.2
 
■Figure D2.3.4 The investigation of the osmotic concentration of potato tuber tissue
 
■Estimation of osmotic concentration of tissues by bathing 
samples in hypotonic and hypertonic solutions
Changes in tissue length and mass can be measured and analyzed to deduce isotonic solute 
concentration. The aim of this experiment is to determine the solute concentration, or osmotic 
concentration, of a plant tissue. Potatoes are ideal for the experiment, although other root vegetables 
can be used. Potato tissue is put in a range of sucrose solutions of different osmotic concentration to 
see how they change in mass and length. Osmotic concentration of potato tissue is estimated by 
finding the concentration of sucrose that results in no change in the potato tissue mass or length.
We can use standard deviation and standard error to help in our analysis of the data. These 
measurements indicate variation around the mean. Standard deviation and standard error could 
be determined for the results of this experiment if there are repeats for each concentration, which 
would allow the reliability of length and mass measurements to be compared. You are not required to 
memorize formulae for calculating these statistics.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data
For the investigation you will need the following equipment:
l	 1.00 mol dm−3 sucrose solution
l	 cork borer/chip-maker
l	 distilled water
l	 pipettes
l	 measuring cylinders
l	 boiling tubes
l	 electronic balances
l	 stop clock
l	 ruler or calipers
l	 balances
	
◆Osmotic 
concentration: the 
measure of solute 
concentration, defined as 
the number of osmoles 
(Osm) of solute per 
litre (L).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.3   Water potential
685
Safety
Take care cutting the potato chips. Use a white tile to cut the potato on and do not cut 
towards the body.
Procedure
1	 Make up six sucrose solutions of 1.00, 0.80, 0.60, 0.40, 0.20 and 0.00 mol dm−3 
(see Table D2.3.1).
2	 Use the cork borer to prepare 30 chips of potato, each 30 mm in length.
 
■Figure D2.3.5 Preparing potato chips using a cork borer
3	 Weigh and measure each chip and record its mass (each length should be 30 mm).
4	 Put one chip in each of the solutions. Repeat the test five times with each 
sucrose concentration (i.e. have five boiling tubes containing the solution at each 
concentration, with a chip of known mass and length in each tube).
5	 After 40 minutes, remove the chips and reweigh and remeasure them – taking care to 
remove any excess solution first. (Why do you do this?)
Processing data
6	 Calculate the percentage change in mass and the percentage change in length for 
each chip. This is calculated by working out the change in mass or length, dividing it 
by the original mass or length, and multiplying by 100 (to produce a percentage) (see 
Chapter C3.2, page 546).
7	 Plot a graph of percentage change (y-axis) against sucrose concentration (x-axis) for 
both length and mass.
8	 Estimate the concentration of the potato tissue (its solute potential). This is the point 
when there is no change in mass/length (i.e. no net osmosis, because the solute 
potential is the same in the solution as the cell cytoplasm). Is it the same for both 
length and mass?
 
■Table D2.3.1 Preparing different concentrations of sucrose 
solution, 0.80 mol dm−3 to 0.20 mol dm−3
Volume of  
distilled water/cm3
Volume of  
1.00 mol dm−3 sucrose/cm3
Concentration of  
sucrose/mol dm−3
2.00
8.00 
0.80
4.00 
6.00 
0.60
6.00 
4.00 
0.40
8.00 
2.00 
0.20
Top tip!
The most important 
part of this experiment 
is uniform blotting 
(i.e., drying of potato 
tissue). Ideally, this 
should take into 
account a uniform 
pressure applied by the 
blotting/tissue paper 
when drying a chip, for 
a known time.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
686
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Accurately measuring mass and length
Accurate measurements are needed in scientific experiments. The term ‘accuracy’ 
relates to how close your results are to the true value. Accuracy can be improved by 
carefully measuring mass and length in the experiment on page 685. Limitations in your 
equipment and method will reduce the accuracy of the results. The mass of a substance 
can be measured in the laboratory with an electronic balance. The SI unit for mass is the 
kilogram (kg), smaller masses can be measured in grams (g), and milligrams (mg).  
In length measurement, the standard SI unit is the metre (m). However, a metre rule will 
be subdivided into centimetres (cm) and millimetres (mm). Which of these units is used 
depends on the object being measured. The calibration (markings) of a metal or plastic 
rule are likely to be more accurate than a wooden metre rule.
Tool 3: Mathematics 
Applying general mathematics 
Standard deviation
Calculate the standard deviation for each chip. 
The equation and calculation method are shown in 
Chapter C4.1, page 552. 
Standard error
The standard error (SE) represents how well the 
sample mean approximates to the population mean. 
The larger the sample, the smaller the standard error, 
and the closer the sample mean approximates to the 
population mean. The standard error is obtained by 
dividing the standard deviation, SD, by the square root 
of n, the sample size. 
Standard error (SE) = standard deviation (SD)
n
Processing uncertainties
When graphs are presented showing mean values, the 
standard error can be shown graphically as error bars. 
Error bars are added to each plotted value to demonstrate 
the deviation of the sample from the true population 
mean. Error bars (±1SE) extend above and below 
the points plotted on a graph to show this variability 
(Figure D2.3.6). Non-overlapping error bars demonstrate 
that the difference between mean values is significant (as 
shown in Figure D2.3.6), whereas overlapping error bars 
suggest a non-significant difference.
Data must be expressed to an appropriate number of 
decimal places. Raw and processed data should be 
recorded to a number of decimal places appropriate to 
the sensitivity of the apparatus or instrument. All raw data 
of the same type should be recorded to the same number 
of decimal places. In Table D2.3.2, percentage change was 
recorded to two decimal places and so the mean values 
should be expressed to the same level of precision.
	
◆Standard error (SE): 
an estimate of the 
reliability of the mean 
of a population sample. 
A small standard error 
indicates that the mean 
value is close to the actual 
mean of the population.
Data were collected using the methodology outlined in the Inquiry 2 above. This is shown in 
Table D2.3.2.
 
■Table D2.3.2 Results from investigation to establish the osmotic concentration of potato tissue 
Sucrose concentration/ 
mol dm−3
Percentage change in the mass of the potato chip
Repeat 1
Repeat 2
Repeat 3
Repeat 4
Repeat 5
Mean
SD
SE
0.0
18.43
15.65
21.55
16.53
19.98
18.43
2.42
1.08
0.2
3.88
6.44
2.22
5.23
1.05
3.76
2.18
0.98
0.4
−6.55
−3.05
−6.55
−4.88
−4.12
−5.03
1.53
0.69
0.6
−11.09
−9.55
−10.05
−15.53
−9.55
−11.15
2.53
1.13
0.8
−15.40
−18.55
−17.55
−13.76
−13.42
−15.74
2.27
1.01
1.0
−16.58
−17.23
−21.65
−14.23
−15.22
−16.98
2.86
1.28


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.3   Water potential
687
Standard deviation (SD) was calculated using the STDEV function in Excel. Standard error was then 
calculated using the formula: =STDEV(B3:F3)/SQRT(COUNT(B3:F3)). This shows the calculation 
for data between cells B3 and F3: the equation was copied and applied to other cells.
A graph of the data was plotted (Figure D2.3.6). Error bars were added by clicking on the line of best 
fit, then selecting ‘error bars – custom – specify values’ and then highlighting the SE calculations 
from Excel (for both positive and negative values).
mean percentage change (%)
in mass of the potato chip
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
25
20
15
sucrose concentration/mol dm−3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 
■Figure D2.3.6 Graph showing the relationship between solute concentration and mean 
percentage change in mass; error bars indicate variation of data around mean values
The results show that the chip does not change mass at a sucrose concentration of 0.3 mol dm−3. 
This is the isotonic point, where there is no net osmosis (i.e. no overall movement of water into or out 
of the chip). This gives the osmotic concentration of the chip. The SE for mean values between 0.0 
and 0.6 mol dm−3 are non-overlapping, which suggests that these differences are real and significant. 
The SE bars for 0.8 and 1.0 mol dm−3 do overlap, however, which suggests that the percentage change 
of chips at these two sucrose concentrations are not significantly different.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding
Describe and explain your results from the Inquiry on 
page 684. Interpret your processed data and analysis 
to justify your conclusions. Compare the outcomes of 
your investigation to the accepted scientific context 
discussed in this chapter. The point where the line 
between the data points crosses the x-axis is the point 
at which there is no change in mass. This means that 
there is no net osmosis. (Why is it incorrect to say that 
there is ‘no osmosis’?) This indicates the concentration 
of the cell solution (i.e. it is the same as the external 
solution), that is, the osmotic concentration.
Relate the outcomes of your investigation to your 
stated research question or hypothesis. What was the 
impact of uncertainties on your conclusions?
Evaluating
1	 What were the limitations of the experiment? How 
might they have affected the accuracy of the result? 
How could you improve the experiment to reduce 
these limitations and improve accuracy?
2	 Comment on reliability and identify any anomalous 
results. What is standard deviation and standard 
error, and what does this tell you about your results? 
(Hint: variation around the mean.) Identify and 
discuss the sources and impacts of random and 
systematic errors.
3	 Which results provided the more accurate results – 
the percentage change in length or the percentage 
change in mass? Why is this? 
4	 Explain any realistic and relevant improvements you 
could make to the investigation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
688
Effects of water movement on 
cells that lack a cell wall
The effects of osmosis on plant and animal cells can be quite different.
Can you suggest why?
In an animal cell, the absence of a protective cellulose wall generates a serious problem in terms of 
water relations. A typical animal cell – for example a red blood cell – when placed in pure water or 
a hypotonic solution will quickly swell and break open from the pressure generated by the entry of 
an excessive amount of water by osmosis (Figure D2.3.7). Notice that the same cells, when placed in 
a hypertonic solution, shrink in size due to net water loss from the cytoplasm. Cells in hypertonic 
solutions are described as crenated. These cells are less likely to move smoothly through capillaries, 
which can lead to blood clots. Isotonic tissue fluid (the solution that surrounds cells) therefore needs 
to be maintained in multicellular organisms to prevent harmful changes.
In mammals and other animals, the osmotic concentration of body fluids (blood plasma and tissue 
fluid) is very carefully regulated, maintaining the same osmotic concentration inside and outside 
body cells (isotonic conditions) to avoid such problems. This process is an aspect of osmoregulation 
(Chapter D3.3, page 768).
 
■Osmosis in freshwater aquatic unicellular animals
Many unicellular animals survive in freshwater aquatic environments where the external medium 
is normally hypotonic to their cell solution. These organisms experience a continuous net inflow of 
water by osmosis and are in danger of disruption of the plasma membrane by high internal pressure.
The protozoan Amoeba is one example. In fact, the cytoplasm of amoebae contains a tiny water 
pump, known as a contractile vacuole, which works continuously to pump out excess water. 
The importance of the contractile vacuole to these organisms is fatally demonstrated if the cytoplasm 
is temporarily anaesthetized. The protist quickly bursts (Figure D2.3.8).
contractile vacuole:
water collects here
and is then expelled
from the cell by the
pumping action of
the vacuole
cytoplasm
nucleus
net inflow of water
over the whole
cell surface membrane
pond water – 
is less concentrated
than the solution
in the cytosol of
the Amoeba cell
 
■Figure D2.3.8 Amoeba – the role of the contractile vacuole 
Concept: Continuity and change
Single-celled organisms without a cell wall are adapted to change by using contractile 
vacuoles to remove water from the cell. This maintains the osmotic concentration of the 
cytoplasm and functioning of the organism.
cell swells and bursts
net inﬂow
of water
When the external 
solution is less 
concentrated than the cell 
contents (hypotonic)
When the external 
solution is at the same 
concentration as the cell 
contents (isotonic)
no net water
movement
net outﬂow
of water
cell outline
becomes
crinkled
cell solution becomes
more concentrated
When the external 
solution is more 
concentrated than the cell 
contents (hypertonic)
 
■Figure D2.3.7 Osmosis 
in animal cells
	
◆Contractile vacuole: 
a small vesicle in the 
cytoplasm of many 
freshwater protists that 
expels excess water.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D2.3   Water potential
689
Effects of water movement 
on cells with a cell wall
Osmosis in an individual plant cell, with its cellulose cell wall (Figure D2.3.9), produces different 
outcomes to those of animal cells and protists that do not have a cell wall. Whether the net direction 
of water movement is into or out of a plant cell depends on whether the concentration of the cell 
solution is more or less concentrated than the external solution.
When the external solution is less concentrated than the cell solution (hypotonic), there is a net 
inflow of water into the cell by osmosis and the cell solution becomes diluted. Then the permanent 
vacuole swells due to water uptake, and the membrane of the vacuole pushes against the cytoplasm, 
which in turn presses hard against the cell wall, increasing turgor pressure. If this happens the cell 
is described as turgid. The pressure that develops (due to the stretching of the cell wall) eventually 
becomes so great that it prevents further uptake of water. The cell wall has protected the delicate cell 
contents from damage due to osmosis, but the tissue may be quite rigid due to the internal pressure.
When the external solution is more concentrated than the cell solution (hypertonic), there is a net 
flow of water out of the cell by osmosis and the cell solution becomes more concentrated. As the 
volume of cell solution (cytoplasm and permanent vacuole) decreases, the cytoplasm pulls away from 
parts of the cell wall (contact with the cell wall is maintained at points where there are cytoplasmic 
connections between cells). The cell becomes flaccid and it is said to be plasmolysed (from plasmo 
= cytoplasm, lysis = splitting).
	
◆Turgor pressure: 
hydrostatic pressure in 
a cell that pushes the 
plasma membrane against 
the cell wall.
	
◆Turgid: condition 
where the vacuole of a 
plant cell is full of water, 
pushing the cell membrane 
against the cell wall.
	
◆Flaccid: plant cell that 
has become soft and less 
rigid than normal because 
the cytoplasm within 
its cells has shrunk and 
contracted away from 
the cell walls through loss 
of water.
	
◆Plasmolysis: 
condition when plant cells 
are in hypertonic solutions 
when the cell membrane 
pulls away from the cell 
wall due to reduced cell 
volume and pressure.
net inﬂow
of water
cell solution
diluted
cell wall stretched
(prevents rupture of the cell surface membrane)
cytoplasm
cell is surrounded
by similar cells
plasma membrane
(partially permeable)
cellulose cell wall
(fully permeable)
no net water
movement
net outﬂow
of water
cell solution
becomes more
concentrated
cytoplasm pulls away from the cell wall;
the cell is said to be plasmolysed
When the external solution 
is less concentrated than the 
cell contents (hypotonic)
When the external solution 
is at the same concentration 
as the cell contents (isotonic)
When the external solution is 
more concentrated than the 
cell contents (hypertonic)
membrane of 
permanent vacuole 
(tonoplast)
permanent vacuole
 
■Figure D2.3.9 Osmosis in plant cells
In the case of hypotonic solutions, the cell wall stops the cell bursting and allows the cell to develop 
turgor pressure, which helps to support plant tissues (in the absence of supportive structures such 
as skeletons or shells that animals have). In hypertonic solutions, plant tissue can survive under 
plasmolysed conditions, although not for extensive periods of time. The movement of the plasma 
membrane away from the cell wall enables the solute to enter the space between the wall and 
membrane. Over time this can lead to damage to the membrane.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
690
 ATL D2.3A 
Why are plants rare in sea water? What issues do they face? Use your knowledge of osmosis to 
explain the problems plants encounter in salt water. 
Some plants do exist around coasts and spend some or much of their time in sea water, such as 
mangrove forests. Seagrasses (of which around 60 species exist) are the only flowering plants 
that grow underwater in marine environments. What adaptations do marine plant species have 
that enable them to exist in this environment? (Look back at Chapter B4.1, page 342, to help 
you answer.)
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Medical applications of isotonic solutions
An intravenous (IV) drip is a piece of medical equipment that delivers fluids directly into a patient’s 
circulatory system. The fluid is contained in a small bag, held on a stand above the patient so liquid 
can drip down easily. It is used to treat dehydration (i.e. to replenish lost salts and water to the body) 
and to deliver medicine. 
A sterile saline solution of 0.9% NaCl is safe to use because it has the same solute concentration as 
body tissues and the cells in the blood. If a hypotonic solution is introduced to the body it would 
cause a decrease in the solute concentration of blood plasma, leading to red blood cells swelling 
and bursting, resulting in decreased delivery of oxygen to cells. A high concentration of salt would 
cause water to be lost from red blood cells, causing them to move less freely in capillaries, with the 
potential of blood clots forming.
In the same way that drips need to be isotonic in relation to body tissues and blood plasma, when 
human organs are donated for transplant surgery, they must be maintained in a saline solution that 
is isotonic with the cells of the tissues and organs. This is to prevent damage to cells due to water 
uptake or loss during transit to the recipient patient.
2	 An organ is being prepared for transplant. Explain how the osmotic concentration of 
the solution used to bathe the organ can be determined.
Concept: 
Continuity
The osmotic 
concentration of a 
drip, or a solution 
used to bathe 
transplant organs, 
must be the same 
as that of the blood 
plasma and tissue 
fluid (i.e. isotonic). 
This maintains 
the osmotic 
concentration of 
the blood plasma 
and body tissue, to 
ensure continuity in 
body functions.
Water potential as the potential 
energy of water per unit volume
It is useful to be able to quantify the potential of water to move from one area to another, in order to 
predict the direction and degree of movement. Water potential is used to quantify the tendency of 
water to move from dilute to concentrated solutions due to osmosis. Water potential is the potential 
energy of water per unit volume. As the movement of water within cells generates pressure against 
the membrane, water potential is measured in kilopascals (kPa), which is an SI unit. It is represented 
by the Greek letter ψw (psi).
It is not possible to measure the absolute quantity of potential energy of water, and so measures of 
water potential are standardized relative to pure water at standard atmospheric pressure and 20 °C.
	
◆Water potential: the 
potential energy of water 
per unit volume, relative 
to pure water, denoted 
by the symbol ψw (psi) 
and expressed in units of 
pressure (kPa).
3	 Define the term 
water potential.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D2.3   Water potential
691
Movement of water from higher 
to lower water potential
Water with a low concentration of solute, and therefore a high water potential, will have a high 
potential energy for movement, whereas a solution that has a high concentration of solute and 
therefore low water potential, will have a lower potential energy for the movement of water. 
In solutions containing a solute, the water molecules form hydrogen bonds with the solute 
(Figure D2.3.1, page 681), restricting the freedom of movement of water and lowering the potential 
energy. Water containing a solute will have a lower water potential than pure water. Water therefore 
moves from a region where it has a higher water potential (i.e. lower solute concentration and higher 
potential energy) to a region where it has a lower water potential (i.e. higher solute concentration and 
lower potential energy).
Contributions of solute potential 
and pressure potential to the water 
potential of cells with walls
As we have seen, the concentration of a solute determines the water potential of a solution. 
The pressure within a cell also determines the movement of water – a higher pressure will result in 
greater potential energy and, therefore, water potential. 
Dissolving any solute in pure water lowers the water potential (i.e. leads to a more negative 
value). The highest water potential is generally taken to be zero, which is found in pure water 
(Figure D2.3.10).
pure water
dilute solution (of solute)
concentrated solution (of solute)
highest water potential
lower water potential
Solution
0 (zero)
negative
e.g. −50kPa
more negative
e.g. −100kPa
Water potential (ψw)
 
■Figure D2.3.10 Water potential becomes more negative as solute is added to a solution
Water potential can be calculated using the following equation:
 
ψw = ψs + ψp
 where ψw = water potential
 
ψs = solute potential
 
ψp = pressure potential
Both solute and pressure potentials are measured in terms of their effect on water potential, and so 
the unit in both cases is kPa. Because adding a solute to a solution lowers the water potential, solute 
potentials can range from zero downwards (Figure D2.3.10). 
4	 Explain why 
water moves from 
a higher to lower 
water potential.
5	 Describe the 
effect of adding 
salt to a solution 
that is bathing 
animal tissue.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Cells
692
Pressure potentials, because of the movement of water molecules pushing against the cell membrane 
and the cell wall of plant, fungi and prokaryote cells, are generally positive inside cells. Negative 
pressure potentials can occur, however, inside xylem vessels where sap (mainly water) is being drawn 
up the plant under tension (see Chapter B3.2, page 303).
Water potential and water 
movements in plant tissue
As we saw in the experiment to determine the osmotic concentration of plant tissue (page 683), 
plant cells gain water in a hypotonic solution and lose water in a hypertonic solution by osmosis. 
The following changes occur when plant tissue is bathed in these solutions.
In a hypotonic solution:
l	 As water moves into the cell, pressure potential increases. This is because there are a 
greater number of water molecules in the cell. The increased potential energy of water means 
that there is increased potential for water molecules to move and exert pressure on the 
plasma membrane.
l	 The solute concentration decreases because the number of solute molecules relative to water 
molecules decreases.
l	 Overall, the water potential of the cell increases (due to a decreasingly negative solute 
concentration and an increasingly positive pressure potential).
In a hypertonic solution:
l	 As water moves out from the cell, pressure potential decreases. This is because there are 
fewer water molecules in the cell. The decreased potential energy of water means that there is a 
decreased potential for water molecules to move and exert pressure on the plasma membrane.
l	 The solute concentration increases because the number of solute molecules relative to water 
molecules increases.
l	 Overall, the water potential of the cell decreases (due to an increasingly negative solute 
concentration and a decreasing pressure potential).
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What variables influence the direction of movement of materials in tissues?
2	 What are the implications of solubility differences between chemical substances for 
living organisms?
6	 Distinguish 
between solute 
potential and 
pressure potential.
7	 Describe how 
solute potential 
and pressure 
potential are used 
to determine water 
potential.
8	 Deduce the 
changes to the 
pressure and solute 
potential of a plant 
tissue placed in a 
hypotonic solution.
Concept: 
Change
The water potential 
of a cell will 
change if placed 
in a hypertonic or 
hypotonic solution, 
although the effects 
on solute and 
pressure potentials 
are different in 
each case. 
