D3.1   Reproduction
693
Reproduction
D3.1
•	 How does asexual or sexual reproduction exemplify themes of change or continuity?
•	 What changes within organisms are required for reproduction?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D3.1.1 	 Differences between sexual and asexual reproduction
	 D3.1.2 	 Role of meiosis and fusion of gametes in the sexual life cycle
	 D3.1.3 	 Differences between male and female sexes in sexual reproduction
	 D3.1.4 	 Anatomy of the human male and female reproductive systems
	 D3.1.5 	 Changes during the ovarian and uterine cycles and their hormonal regulation
	 D3.1.6 	 Fertilization in humans
	 D3.1.7 	 Use of hormones in in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment
	 D3.1.8 	 Sexual reproduction in flowering plants
	 D3.1.9 	 Features of an insect-pollinated flower
	 D3.1.10 	Methods of promoting cross-pollination
	 D3.1.11 	Self-incompatibility mechanisms to increase genetic variation within a species
	 D3.1.12 	Dispersal and germination of seeds
	 D3.1.13 	Control of the developmental changes of puberty by gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone and steroid sex hormones (HL only)
	 D3.1.14 	Spermatogenesis and oogenesis in humans (HL only)
	 D3.1.15 	Mechanisms to prevent polyspermy (HL only)
	 D3.1.16 	Development of a blastocyst and implantation in the endometrium (HL only)
	 D3.1.17 	Pregnancy testing by detection of human chorionic gonadotropin secretion 
(HL only)
	 D3.1.18 	Role of the placenta in foetal development inside the uterus (HL only)
	 D3.1.19 	Hormonal control of pregnancy and childbirth (HL only)
	 D3.1.20 	Hormone replacement therapy and the risk of coronary heart disease (HL only)
Differences between sexual and 
asexual reproduction
There are two types of reproduction: asexual and sexual. In asexual reproduction there are no 
gametes (e.g. eggs and sperm) and no fertilization. Eukaryotic cells undergo mitosis (see Chapter D2.1) 
and a structure which breaks away from the main body is formed: this structure grows into a new 
creature. All offspring produced by asexual reproduction are genetically identical.
Single-celled organisms tend to reproduce asexually as they cannot have specialized reproductive 
organs. A yeast cell, for example, simply divides in two to reproduce (Figure D3.1.1). Single-celled 
protists also divide asexually, such as Amoeba.
	
◆Asexual 
reproduction: 
reproduction not 
involving gametes and 
fertilization.
	
◆Sexual 
reproduction: 
reproduction involving 
the production and fusion 
of gametes.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
694
Examples of asexual reproduction in plants include the production of runners (for example, in 
strawberries) that grow into clones of the parent plant, bulbs that can divide and produce clones, 
and tubers (such as the potato) that can split to produce several genetically identical new plants.
Some animals can reproduce asexually, for example many insects such as greenfly, and aquatic 
hydra. Hydra reproduce asexually by budding off a daughter polyp (as seen in Figure D3.1.2). 
The mouth of the hydra (upper centre) is surrounded by tentacles that it uses to capture small items 
of food that float past on the current.
Sexual reproduction is the production of offspring from two parents using gametes (e.g. eggs and 
sperm). The cells of the offspring have two sets of chromosomes (one from each parent). Sexual 
reproduction involves two stages:
l	 meiosis – the special cell division that makes gametes with half the number of chromosomes 
(one set) (Chapter D2.1)
l	 fertilization – the fusion of male and female gametes to form a zygote (back to two sets of 
chromosomes).
In sexual reproduction, DNA from one generation is passed to the next by gametes. Sexual 
reproduction is a source of genetic variation, when DNA from a mother is ‘shuffled’ with DNA from 
a father. It involves the random fusion of gametes, which also leads to variation (any sperm can 
fertilize the egg). Variation is therefore produced by combining genes in different combinations in the 
gametes and by random fusion of gametes.
Sexual reproduction is a much more complex process than asexual reproduction. Some animals 
reproduce through external fertilization, where males and females release their gametes into the 
water. Many species of fish do this – the process is called spawning. Most animals on land reproduce 
through internal fertilization, where males ejaculate sperm into the bodies of the females.
By reproducing sexually, organisms generate variation in a population, which is an advantage if the 
environment is changing and they need to adapt to these changes. Or they can reproduce asexually 
when the conditions are constant and all offspring can be identical. For example, aphids (greenfly) 
reproduce asexually in spring and summer, when conditions are predictable and stable, and sexually 
in autumn, creating variation in offspring to allow populations to adapt to changing conditions.
Top tip!
While reproduction ensures continuity of a species though time, with sexual reproduction the 
genetic code of a species is passed on to the next generation with modification derived from 
meiosis and random fertilization, which produces variation. Variation allows a population to adapt 
to a changing or changed environment. In asexual reproduction, offspring are genetically identical 
to their parent, which allows a population to grow rapidly in an unchanging environment.
Role of meiosis and fusion of  
gametes in the sexual life cycle
In sexual reproduction, a male and a female gamete (specialized sex cells) fuse to form a zygote, 
which then grows into a new individual. In the process of gamete formation, a nuclear division by 
meiosis (page 656) halves the normal chromosome number. Gametes are haploid and fertilization 
restores the diploid number of chromosomes (Figure D3.1.3). 
Without the reductive nuclear division in the process of meiosis, the chromosome number would 
double in each generation. Remember, the offspring produced by sexual reproduction are unique, in 
complete contrast with offspring formed by asexual reproduction. 
 
■Figure D3.1.1 A 
yeast cell reproducing 
asexually – a process 
known as budding
 
■Figure D3.1.2 Asexual 
reproduction in hydra
	
◆Gamete: a haploid 
male or female sex cell 
that is able to unite with 
another of the other sex 
to form a zygote.
	
◆Fertilization: the 
fusion of male and female 
gametes to form a zygote.
Link
The process of meiosis 
is covered in Chapter 
D2.1, page 656.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
695
Egg (ovum) 
23 chromosomes
Sperm 
23 chromosomes
Zygote
46 chromosomes in 
23 pairs
Embryo
46 chromosomes in 
23 pairs
Fertilization
 
■Figure D3.1.3 Meiosis maintains the number of chromosomes in the cells of offspring, 
preventing the doubling of the number of chromosomes that would occur otherwise
During meiosis, paternal and maternal chromosomes are randomly assorted into new haploid cells 
(page 110). In this way, meiosis breaks up parental combinations of alleles. Gametes, due to random 
assortment and crossing over, have a unique sequence of alleles that were not present in either parent 
(see page 660). 
The fusion of gametes is random – any male gamete can fertilize the egg, and the egg itself has a 
unique set of alleles not present in any other egg. The fusion of gametes is known as fertilization. 
This process produces new combinations of alleles that are unique to the new organism. 
Differences between male and female 
sexes in sexual reproduction
Male and female gametes (sex cells) are adapted to their specific roles in reproduction (Chapter B2.3, 
page 271). The male gamete travels to the female gamete, so it is smaller, with fewer energy reserves 
than the egg. For at least one male gamete to reach the egg, large numbers must be produced – 
another reason for its small size. Female gametes are fewer and larger in size to provide nutrients and 
energy for the growing embryo.
In the animal kingdom, because females generally produce relatively few eggs compared to sperm, they 
tend to choose their mate carefully and not have multiple partners. In mammals, once pregnant, the 
female feeds and nurtures the growing offspring; there is no benefit of sexual intercourse with other 
males, and there are periods when she cannot carry out further reproduction. The reproductive strategy 
of a male is different, because of the large number of sperm produced and the ability to fertilize eggs 
from multiple females. Males can have several mates and reproduce continually throughout life.
Anatomy of the human male and 
female reproductive systems
Organisms that carry out sexual reproduction have highly specialized reproductive organs to ensure the 
gametes from the male can reach the gametes of the female. In mammals, as in most of the vertebrates, 
the sexes are separate (unisexual individuals). In the body, the reproductive and urinary (excretory) 
systems are closely bound together, especially in the male, so biologists refer to these as the urinogenital 
system. Here, just the human reproductive systems are considered (Figures D3.1.4 and D3.1.5).
Top tip!
Make sure you can 
draw diagrams of 
the male-typical 
and female-typical 
reproductive systems, 
and annotate them with 
names of structures 
and functions.
Common 
mistake
The chromosome 
numbers shown in 
Figure D3.1.3 are only 
for Homo sapiens. 
Other species have 
different numbers of 
chromosomes. Defining 
haploid cells as having 
23 chromosomes is 
incorrect outside the 
context of human 
reproduction.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
696
 
■Male reproductive system
The male reproductive system has the following anatomy: 
l	 Two testes (singular, testis) are situated in the scrotal sac (scrotum), hanging outside the main 
body cavity; this allows the testes to be at the optimum temperature for sperm production, 
2–3 °C lower than the normal body temperature. As well as producing the male gametes, 
spermatozoa (singular, spermatozoon) or sperm, the testes also produce the male sex hormone, 
testosterone; the testes are, therefore, also endocrine glands (page 493). 
l	 The epididymis stores the sperm and the sperm ducts carry them in a fluid, called seminal 
fluid (semen), to the outside of the body during a process called ejaculation. 
l	 Ducted or exocrine glands secrete the nutritive seminal fluid (made of alkali, proteins and 
fructose) in which the sperm are transported; these glands include the seminal vesicles and 
prostate gland. Seminal fluid (semen) therefore contains sperm as well as fluid from the seminal 
vesicles and prostate gland. 
l	 The urethra is a duct that carries semen during an ejaculation (and urine during urination) to 
the outside. 
l	 The penis contains spongy erectile tissue that can fill with blood when the male is sexually 
stimulated. This causes the penis to enlarge, lengthen and become rigid, in a condition known as 
an erection. The erect penis penetrates the vagina in sexual intercourse. 
ureter
sperm 
duct
seminal 
vesicle
prostate 
gland
rectum
bladder
erectile tissue,
blood sinuses that
can ﬁll with blood
from the artery at
the base of the
penis
spermatic cord
(sperm duct and
blood vessels)
urethra
penis
foreskin
glans
scrotum
testis
coiled tubes
(epididymis)
in section
sperm duct
urethra
testis
penis
seen from the front
 
■Figure D3.1.4 The male urinogenital system
 
■Female reproductive system
The female reproductive system has the following anatomy: 
l	 The ovaries are held near the base of the abdominal cavity. As well as producing the female 
gametes, ova or egg cells, the ovaries are also endocrine glands, secreting the female sex 
hormones oestradiol (which used to be known as oestrogen) and progesterone. 
l	 A pair of oviducts (also known as fallopian tubes) extend from the uterus and open as funnels 
close to the ovaries. The oviducts transport egg cells and are the site of fertilization. 
	
◆Testis (plural, 
testes): site of sperm 
production; produces 
testosterone.
	
◆Sperm 
(spermatozoa): motile 
male gamete.
	
◆Sperm duct: tube 
carrying sperm from the 
epididymis to the urethra.
	
◆Seminal fluid 
(semen): male 
reproductive fluid, 
containing spermatozoa 
in a liquid that supports 
the sperm.
	
◆Prostate gland: 
releases alkaline secretion 
that neutralises any urine 
left in the urethra and 
aids sperm mobility.
	
◆Urethra: tube that 
runs from the bladder to 
the outside of the body; 
in male vertebrates also 
conveys semen.
	
◆Penis: an external male 
organ used for urination 
and sexual intercourse.
	
◆Ovary: female 
reproductive organ in 
which the female gametes 
are formed; gland which 
secretes oestradiol and 
progesterone.
	
◆Oviduct: tube 
connecting ovary to 
uterus; site of fertilization.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
697
l	 The uterus, which is about the size and shape of an inverted pear, has a thick muscular wall and 
an inner lining of mucous membrane that is richly supplied with arterioles. This lining, called the 
endometrium, undergoes regular change in, on average, a 28-day cycle. The lining is built up 
each month in preparation for implantation and early nutrition of a developing embryo, should 
fertilization occur. If it does not occur, the endometrium disintegrates and menstruation begins. 
l	 The vagina is a muscular tube that can enlarge to allow entry of the penis and exit of a baby at 
birth. The vagina is connected to the uterus at the cervix and it opens to the exterior at the vulva. 
uterus
ovary
oviduct
ureter
bladder
cervix
rectum
vagina
labia
clitoris
vulva
urethra
in section
oviduct
ovary
uterus
vagina
seen from the front
 
■Figure D3.1.5 The female urinogenital system
Common mistake
When drawing the reproductive system, it is important to ensure that connections between the parts 
of the reproductive system are correct. In the male reproductive system, the distances between and 
connections of the sperm duct, prostate gland and urethra need to be drawn correctly, for example. 
In the female reproductive system, oviducts need to lead to the space within the uterus, not into the 
wall of the uterus.
	
◆Uterus: the organ 
in which the embryo 
develops in female 
mammals.
	
◆Endometrium: the 
lining of the uterus.
	
◆Menstruation: 
shedding of the 
endometrium from the 
uterus.
	
◆Vagina: muscular 
canal leading from uterus 
to outside of body.
	
◆Cervix: ring of muscles 
at neck of uterus.
Top tip!
Diagrams drawn as 
a side view tend to 
be better in terms 
of proportions and 
relative positions of the 
different structures.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
698
Changes during the ovarian and uterine 
cycles and their hormonal regulation
Concept: Change
Changes in the blood concentration of four hormones, controlled by feedback loops, 
coordinate the menstrual cycle.
In the female reproductive system:
l	 The secretion of oestradiol and progesterone is cyclical, rather than at a steady rate. Together with 
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), the changing concentrations 
of all four hormones bring about a repeating cycle of changes that we call the menstrual cycle. 
l	 The menstrual cycle consists of two cycles: the ovarian cycle taking place in the ovaries 
and the uterine cycle in the uterine lining. The ovarian cycle is concerned with the monthly 
preparation and shedding of an egg cell from an ovary, while the uterine cycle is concerned with 
the build-up of the lining of the uterus. ‘Menstrual’ means ‘monthly’; the combined cycles take, 
on average, 28 days (Figure D3.1.6). 
5  falling levels of LH + FSH allow corpus
    luteum to degenerate
          levels of progesterone + oestradiol fall
          endometrium breaks down
          stimulates restarting of the cycle
hypothalamus
(part of forebrain)
releasing hormone from
hypothalamus controls release
of FSH and LH by the
anterior pituitary
inhibits LH
inhibits FSH
1  secretion of
    FSH
3  LH
    ovulation
2  growth of
    follicle
secretion of
oestradiol
4  corpus luteum
    secretes
    progesterone
oestradiol     +     progesterone
anterior
pituitary
gland
negative feedback control
	
◆Follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH): 
hormone that stimulates 
the growth of ovarian 
follicles in the ovary.
	
◆Luteinizing 
hormone (LH): 
hormone that stimulates 
ovulation and corpus 
luteum formation.
	
◆Menstrual cycle: 
monthly cycle of ovulation 
and menstruation in 
human females.
	
◆Ovarian cycle: the 
monthly changes that 
occur to ovarian follicles 
leading to ovulation and 
the formation of a corpus 
luteum.
	
◆Uterine cycle: cycle 
of changes to the uterus 
lining (approximately 
28 days).
 
■Figure D3.1.6 
Hormone regulation of 
the menstrual cycle


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
699
The menstrual cycle is controlled by negative and positive feedback mechanisms involving ovarian 
and pituitary hormones. The changing concentrations of all four hormones bring about a repeating 
cycle of changes.
By convention, the start of the cycle is taken as the first day of menstruation (bleeding), which is the 
shedding of the endometrium lining of the uterus. The steps, also summarized in Figure D3.1.7, are 
as follows.
1	 FSH is secreted by the pituitary gland and stimulates the development of several immature egg 
cells (in primary follicles) in the ovary. Only one will complete development into a mature egg 
cell (now in the ovarian follicle). 
2	 The developing follicle then secretes oestradiol. Oestradiol has two targets:
a	 In the uterus it stimulates the build-up of the endometrium, the lining, for a possible 
implantation of an embryo should fertilization take place.
b	 Leads to an increase in FSH receptors in the follicles, increasing oestradiol production further 
(this is an example of positive feedback).
3	 The concentration of oestradiol continues to increase to a peak value just before the mid-point of 
the cycle. When oestradiol reaches its highest level, it inhibits further secretion of FSH from the 
pituitary gland. This prevents the possibility of further follicles being stimulated to develop (an 
example of negative feedback).
4	 The high level of oestradiol stimulates the secretion of LH by the pituitary gland. LH stimulates 
ovulation (the shedding of the mature egg cell from the ovarian follicle and it being released 
from the ovary) on day 14 of the cycle.
As soon as the ovarian follicle has discharged its egg, LH also stimulates the conversion of the 
vacant follicle into an additional temporary gland, called a corpus luteum (plural, corpora lutea). 
5	 The corpus luteum secretes progesterone and, to a lesser extent, oestradiol. Progesterone has 
two targets:
a	 In the uterus, it continues the build-up of the endometrium, further preparing for a possible 
implantation of an embryo should fertilization take place.
b	 In the pituitary gland, it inhibits further secretion of LH, and also of FSH; this is a second 
example of negative feedback control. 
6	 The levels of FSH and LH in the bloodstream now rapidly decrease. Low levels of FSH and 
LH allow the corpus luteum to degenerate. As a consequence, the levels of progesterone and 
oestradiol also fall. Soon the levels of these hormones are so low that the extra lining of the 
uterus is no longer maintained. The endometrium breaks down and is lost through the vagina 
in the first five days or so of the new cycle. Falling levels of progesterone again cause the secretion 
of FSH by the pituitary.
7	 A new cycle is under way. 
8	 If the egg is fertilized (the start of a pregnancy), then the developing embryo itself immediately 
becomes an endocrine gland, secreting a hormone that circulates in the blood and maintains the 
corpus luteum as an endocrine gland for at least 16 weeks of pregnancy. When, eventually, the 
corpus luteum does break down, the placenta takes over as an endocrine gland, secreting 
oestradiol and progesterone. These hormones continue to prevent ovulation and maintain 
the endometrium. 
Link
Negative feedback is 
also covered in the 
following chapters: 
C2.1 (HL only), page 
465; C4.1, page 557, 
and D3.3, page 761. 
Positive feedback is 
also covered in the 
following chapters: 
C3.1, page 516; D3.1, 
page 723, and D4.3, 
page 825. 
	
◆Ovarian follicle: 
a fluid-filled spherical 
sac that contains and 
nourishes an immature 
egg, or oocyte.
	
◆Ovulation: release of 
oocyte (egg) from ovary.
	
◆Corpus luteum: 
a hormone-secreting 
structure that develops 
from an ovarian follicle 
after an oocyte has been 
discharged. It degenerates 
after a few days unless 
pregnancy has begun.
Top tip!
The graph in Figure 
D3.1.7 on page 700, 
shows the various 
hormone changes 
during the menstrual 
cycle. Can you explain 
what each hormone 
does, what feedback 
mechanisms (negative 
and positive) are 
involved and how 
they operate?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
700
ovarian cycle
uterine cycle
LH
FSH
egg cell in follicle growing
ovulation
corpus luteum
(no fertilization)
degenerates
blood vessels
endometrium grows
endometrium of uterus
breaks down
at menstruation
time (days)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
11
10
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
levels of
FSH and LH
in the blood
levels of the
female sex
hormones
in the blood
preparing an egg cell for release
building the endometrium for implantation
oestradiol
progesterone
 
■Figure D3.1.7 Changing levels of hormones in the menstrual cycle
Common mistake
The roles of FSH and LH are sometimes confused. Make sure you know the differences between the 
two. The two pituitary hormones have distinct roles and each of the different effects needs to be 
discussed and explained. For example, LH promotes secretion of oestradiol by cells in the developing 
follicle and stimulates ovulation. Follicle development itself is stimulated by FSH only. The LH surge is 
a good predictor of ovulation for someone wanting to conceive because LH stimulates ovulation.
1	 Identify the 
critical hormone 
changes that 
respectively trigger 
ovulation and cause 
degeneration of the 
corpus luteum. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
701
 ATL D3.1A 
The change in the mean diameter of follicles and the subsequent corpora lutea (see Figure D3.1.23, page 716)  
in the ovary over a 40-day period is recorded in the table below.
Days
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
Follicles/mm
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.1
4.3
8.0
11.0
6.0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corpora lutea/mm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
9.5
9.0
8.4
7.2
6.4
5.0
Next batch of follicles/mm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.5
 
2.0
 
10.0
 
4.0
 
4.3
 
11.0
1	 Using an Excel spreadsheet, plot a graph to show the 
change in mean diameter in follicles and corpora lutea over 
the 40-day cycle.
2	 How do we know, from the data given, that fertilization did 
not occur during these 40 days?
3	 When was fertilization most likely to happen, if 
insemination had occurred?
4	 Draw a labelled diagram of the follicle at the time 
of fertilization.
5	 What is the role of the corpora lutea?
6	 a	 What hormones trigger the growth and development 
of follicles on days 0 and 20?
b	 Where are these hormones released from?
Fertilization in humans
At fertilization, the sperm’s cell membrane fuses with an egg cell membrane (see Figure B2.3.5, 
page 261). The sperm nucleus enters the egg but the tail and mitochondria remain outside the egg and 
are ultimately destroyed. All the mitochondria in a cell therefore derive from the egg. 
Following the fusion of the two cells, the nuclear membranes of sperm and egg nuclei break down. 
The newly joined homologous pairs of chromosomes, one set from the egg and one from the sperm, 
condense and participate in a joint mitosis to produce two diploid nuclei.
In mammals, including humans, fertilization – the fusion of male and female gametes to form a 
zygote – is internal. It occurs in the upper part of the oviduct. 
Use of hormones in IVF treatment
Natural fertilization and the production of a zygote requires both partners to be fertile, i.e. able to 
produce gametes and, in the case of the male, deliver them to the female. Not all partners, however, 
are fertile. Either the male or female, or both, may be infertile, due to a number of different causes 
(Table D3.1.1).
 
■Table D3.1.1 Causes of infertility
In males, infertility may be due to:
In females, infertility may be due to:
failure to achieve or maintain an erect penis 
structurally abnormal sperm
sperm with poor mobility
short-lived sperm
too few sperm
a blocked sperm duct, preventing semen from 
containing sperm
conditions of the cervix that cause death of sperm 
conditions in uterus that prevent implantation 
of embryo 
eggs that fail to mature or be released
blocked or damaged oviducts, preventing egg from 
reaching sperm


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
702
In some cases, a couple’s infertility may be overcome by the process of fertilization of eggs outside the 
body – in vitro fertilization (IVF). The key step in IVF is the successful removal of sufficient eggs 
from the ovaries. To achieve this, normal menstrual activity is temporarily suspended with hormone-
based drugs. Then, the ovaries are induced to produce a large number of eggs simultaneously, at a 
time controlled by doctors. In this way, the optimum moment to collect the eggs can be 
known accurately. 
The steps of in vitro fertilization are as follows:
1	 Down-regulation is the first step in IVF, shutting down of the menstrual cycle by stopping secretion 
of the pituitary and ovarian hormones. The process takes about two weeks and allows better control 
of superovulation. Down-regulation is done with a drug, commonly in the form of a nasal spray.
2	 The next step is superovulation. High doses of FSH are injected over approximately a 10-day 
period to stimulate the development of multiple follicles.
3	 When follicles reach 15–20 mm in diameter, an injection of hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin 
hormone, normally secreted by the developing embryo and which maintains the corpus luteum) 
is given to start the maturation process; after approximately 36 hours, follicles (typically 8–12) 
are collected from the ovaries under a general anaesthetic.
4	 Prepared eggs (i.e. removed from the follicles) are combined with sperm in sterile conditions.
5	 Successfully fertilized eggs are then incubated before implantation.
6	 For approximately two weeks before implantation the woman takes progesterone (which 
maintains the endometrium) to aid implantation. This treatment is continued until pregnancy 
testing and, if positive, until 12 weeks of gestation.
7	 Embryos at the eight-cell stage may be placed in the uterus. If one (or more) embed there, then a 
normal pregnancy may follow.
Because the natural success rate of implantation is around 40%, usually two or three blastocysts 
(growing fertilized eggs) are implanted: as a consequence, the chance of IVF treatment leading to 
multiple pregnancies is high.
The first ‘test-tube baby’ was born in 1978. Today, the procedure is regarded as a routine one. 
Sexual reproduction in flowering plants
Flowering plants contain their reproductive organs in the flower. Flowers are often hermaphrodite 
structures, carrying both male and female parts. Note: reproduction in flowering plants is sexual, 
even if a plant species is hermaphroditic.
The reproductive structures of plants are very different to those of animals. The ovum is contained 
within a structure called an ovule, which also contains a store of nutrients. The ovule, once the ovum 
has been fertilized, becomes the seed of the plant. The male reproductive cells are pollen, which travel 
to the female reproductive part in the same plant, or from plant to plant, either carried by insects 
(e.g. bees) or on the wind.
Pollination is the transfer of pollen from a mature anther to a receptive stigma. When the pollen 
travels to the female organs of the flower, pollination occurs. The pollen travels down a structure 
in the flower to allow it access to the ovule and, ultimately, the ovum, where fertilization occurs to 
produce an embryo. 
Fertilization (fusion of male and female gametes to form a zygote) in flowering plants can occur only 
after an appropriate pollen grain has landed on the stigma and germinated. The pollen grain produces 
a pollen tube, which grows down between the cells of the style into the ovule (Figure D3.1.8). 
	
◆In vitro fertilization 
(IVF): medical procedure 
in which an egg is 
fertilized by sperm in a test 
tube (in vitro = in glass).
2	 Explain what 
in vitro and in 
vivo mean.
	
◆Ovule: in the 
flowering plant flower, 
the structure in an ovary 
which, after fertilization, 
grows into the seed.
	
◆Pollen: microspore 
produced in anthers (and 
male cones) containing 
male gamete(s).
	
◆Pollination: transfer 
of pollen from anther to 
stigma.
	
◆Pollen tube: grows 
out of a pollen grain 
attached to a stigma, and 
down through the style 
tissue to the embryo sac.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
703
Incidentally, the pollen tube delivers two male nuclei. One of 
these male nuclei fuses with the egg nucleus in the embryo 
sac, forming a diploid zygote. The other fuses with another 
nucleus, triggering formation of the food store for the 
developing embryo. This ‘double fertilization’ is unique to 
flowering plants.
Features of an insect-
pollinated flower
The parts of flowers occur in rings or whorls, attached to 
the swollen tip of the flower stalk, called the receptacle. 
The sepals (collectively, the calyx) enclose the flower in 
the bud, and are usually small, green and leaf-like. The 
petals (collectively, the corolla) are often coloured and 
conspicuous, and may attract insects or other small animals. 
The stamens are the male parts of the flower, and consist 
of anthers (housing pollen grains) and the filaments (stalk). The carpels are the female part of the 
flower. There may be one or many, free-standing or fused together. Each carpel consists of an ovary 
(containing ovules), a stigma (a surface for receiving pollen) and a connecting style.
The buttercup flower is shown in Figure D3.1.9, and other flowers that are common in different parts 
of the world are shown in Figure D3.1.10.
carpels
stigma
carpel
nectary
ﬂower stalk
receptacle
(expanded tip
of ﬂower stalk)
anther
ﬁlament stamen
sepal
petal
style
ovary
containing
ovule
the buttercup ﬂower in cross-section
In the buttercup the nectaries occur
once at the base of each petal.
the inﬂorescence of buttercup 
(Ranunculus acris)
 
■Figure D3.1.9 The buttercup (Ranunculus) flower
Tool 1: Experimental techniques 
Drawing an annotated diagram from observation
Select a flower and create a half-flower drawing of your specimen. You will have to cut 
the flower in half, in a longitudinal section (i.e. down the longest length of the flower), 
to do this. Annotate your drawing and add the magnification.
3	 Explain the 
differences 
between pollination 
and fertilization in 
the flowering plant.
	
◆Sepal: green structures 
that cover the flower 
while it is developing.
	
◆Petal: large, colourful 
structure that attracts 
pollinators to the flower.
	
◆Stamen: the male part 
of the flowers, consisting 
of the anther and filament.
	
◆Anther: produces 
pollen, which contains the 
male gamete.
	
◆Filament: structure 
that holds up the anther, 
presenting it to visiting 
animals.
	
◆Carpel: the female 
part of the flower, made 
from the stigma, style and 
ovary.
	
◆Stigma: the part of the 
female reproductive organs 
where the pollen lands.
	
◆Style: holds up the 
stigma and is the path 
down which the pollen 
tube grows, carrying the 
pollen nuclei to the ovum.
egg cell – a male
nucleus fuses with the
egg cell     zygote
(fertilization)
micropyle
pollen tube grows down into
the ovary, tip enters the ovule
via the micropyle (gap in the
wall)
pollen grain
has germinated
a male nucleus
fuses here,
which triggers
formation of a
food store for
the embryo
stigma
male nuclei
ovule
ovary
style
pollen tube
 
■Figure D3.1.8 Fertilization in a flowering plant


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
704
Bougainvillea rosenka Native of tropical and sub-
tropical South America. The flowers are small but 
surrounded by brightly coloured leaves (bracts).
Hibiscus syriacus Native of warm 
temperate, tropical and sub-tropical regions 
throughout the world. The large, trumpet-
shaped flowers have five petals.
 
■Figure D3.1.10 Other animal-pollinated flowers common in different parts of the world
Methods of promoting cross-pollination
Pollen may come from flowers on a different plant of the same species, which is referred to as 
cross-pollination. Transfer of pollen is often brought about by animals (Figure D3.1.11). Pollinators 
include insects, such as butterflies or bees. In other flowers, it may be bird or bat visitors that 
unwittingly carry out pollination. The pollinator is typically attracted by colour or scent (or both), 
and is rewarded by a sugar solution, called nectar, and pollen, which usually form a key part of the 
diet. In return, they accidentally transfer pollen between flowers and between plants. Thus, there is a 
mutualistic relationship between pollinator and plant in plant sexual reproduction. Alternatively, 
pollen may be transferred by the wind or, occasionally, by running water.
 
■Figure D3.1.11 Pollinators at work
A species of plant may want to encourage cross-fertilization, i.e. fertilization with another flower 
rather than with itself (self-pollination). Cross-pollination is achieved by:
l	 the stamen and stigma maturing at different times (Figure D3.1.12)
l	 the stigma and anthers at different heights in same flower (Figure D3.1.13)
l	 separate male and female flowers.
 ATL D3.1B 
Choose an insect-
pollinated flower that 
is available near your 
school or college. 
Study its structure 
and then work out its 
pollination mechanism. 
What insects can visit 
and benefit?
	
◆Cross-pollination: 
pollen transferred from 
the anther of one flower 
to the stigma of another 
flower of the same 
species.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
705
b
mature stigma
immature
anther
anthers
stigma positioned
above anthers
 
■Figure D3.1.12 Anthers and stigma can mature at different times to avoid self-pollination: 
a) anthers are mature but not the stigma; b) stigma is mature but not the anthers
 
■Figure D3.1.13 Stigma and 
anthers at different heights 
to avoid self-pollination
mature
anther
immature stigma
a
Cross-pollination results in outbreeding. 
l	 Advantage: variation and some genomes more successful than others – good if environment 
changes (i.e. evolutionary significance).
l	 Disadvantage: pollen need to find the stigma of other flowers – element of chance (especially in 
wind-pollinated plants).
 ATL D3.1C 
The figures in this section, e.g. Figure D3.1.11, show animal-pollinated plants. Find out about 
wind-pollinated plants. How does the structure of their flowers differ from animal-pollinated 
plants? Why is this? Draw a diagram of a wind-pollinated flower and compare it with an animal-
pollinated flower.
Common 
mistake
It is incorrect to say 
that pollination delivers 
pollen to the ovary. 
Pollination delivers 
pollen grains to the 
stigma, from which 
a pollen tube grows, 
which delivers pollen 
nuclei down the style 
and into the ovary.
Self-incompatibility mechanisms to increase 
genetic variation within a species
The male and female reproductive organs of plants are found in the same flower, which can lead to 
gametes from the same individual coming together at fertilization. This is known as self-pollination. 
Self-pollination results in inbreeding. 
l	 Advantages: preserves good genomes suited to a stable environment.
l	 Disadvantages: reduction in variation; greater chance of two undesirable recessive alleles coming 
together; decreases genetic diversity.
Genetic mechanisms in many plant species ensure that the male and female gametes fusing during 
fertilization are from different plants. Self-incompatibility refers to the recognition and rejection 
of pollen by the carpel of the same flower. This mechanism is genetically controlled and inhibits 
the growth of the pollen tube down the style if the pollen has been produced in the same flower as 
the style, preventing pollen from fertilizing the ovum. Self-incompatibility prevents inbreeding and 
promotes outcrossing. 
	
◆Self-pollination: 
when pollen is transferred 
to the stigma in the 
same flower.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
706
Dispersal and germination of seeds
The seed develops from the fertilized ovule and contains an embryo plant and a food store. After 
fertilization, the following occur:
l	 The zygote grows by repeated mitotic division to produce cells that form an embryonic plant, 
consisting of an embryo root, an embryo stem and either a single cotyledon (seed leaf) or 
two cotyledons.
l	 Formation of stored food reserves is triggered. In many seeds, the developing food store is 
absorbed into the cotyledons, rather than remaining as a separate store that is packed round the 
embryonic plant. For example, this is the case in peas and beans (Figure D3.1.14). Note that the 
formation of food reserves can only occur if fertilization occurs – in the absence of fertilization, 
food reserves are not moved into the unfertilized ovule.
As the seed matures, the outer layers of the ovule become the protective seed coat or testa, and the 
whole ovary develops into the fruit. Next, the water content of the seed decreases and the seed moves 
into a dormancy period. In a mature, fully dormant seed, water makes up only 10–15% of seed weight.
seed coat (testa)
formed from
the ovule wall
outline of the
embryo root
position of the
micropyle – you
need to use a 
hand lens to
see this
scar of attachment
to the ovary/fruit
broad bean seed (Vicia faba) 
broad bean seed in section
testa
cotyledon
(one of two)
embryo stem
and embryo root
(attached to and
sandwiched
between the
cotyledons)
micropyle
(a gap)
 
■Figure D3.1.14 The structure of a broad bean seed
 
■Dispersal of seeds
The seed is a form in which the flowering plant may be dispersed. Seed dispersal is the carrying of 
the seed away from the parent plant. It is needed to ensure that the offspring of a parent plant 
eventually germinate some distance away. Seed dispersal is a different process to pollination. 
Pollination is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of flowers, whereas seed 
dispersal is a mechanism by which a plant’s seeds (fertilized ovules) are moved to new areas, away 
from the parent plant, ready for germination and the establishment of new plants.
The plant structures to aid dispersal that have evolved exploit air currents (wind), passing animals or 
flowing water to transport seeds (Figure D3.1.15a, b and d). In a few plants, seeds are flung away 
from the ripening fruit by an explosive mechanism (Figure D3.1.15c). The force that generates the 
explosion is from turgor pressure within the fruit or due to internal tensions within the fruit. 
Other plants (such as coconuts) use water for dispersal. All seeds are compact, nutritious and 
relatively lightweight – in effect, they are food packages to a hungry animal. Many seeds taken for 
food are dropped and lost, or stored and forgotten. In this way, some seeds are successfully dispersed.
 ATL D3.1D 
The drawing of a 
broad bean seed in 
Figure D3.1.14 shows 
how structure can 
be recorded, once 
the seed has been 
examined. Try this with 
other seeds, such as a 
sunflower seed. Does 
the structure of the 
seed vary with species 
or size of plant?
	
◆Seed dispersal: the 
carrying of the seed away 
from the parent plant.
Top tip!
Seeds need to be 
dispersed away from the 
parent plant in order to 
reduce competition for 
space, light, nutrients 
and water.
4	 Distinguish 
between seed 
dispersal and 
pollination.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.1   Reproduction
707
 
■Figure D3.1.15 Methods of seed dispersal: a) wind – seed of the South East Asian hardwood species Dipterocarpus 
obtusifolius being dispersed by wind; b) water – coco de mer or sea coconut (Lodoicea maldivica), a rare species of palm 
tree native to the Seychelles archipelago in the Indian Ocean, is distributed by water; it forms the largest seed on Earth; 
c) mechanical – high-speed photo of the seeds of Himalayan balsam (Impatiens glandulifera) being dispersed by an explosive 
mechanism in the fruit; d) animal – a cedar waxwing (Bombycilla cedrorum) eating a mulberry fruit in North America
a
d
c
b
 
■Germination of seeds
Many seeds do not germinate as soon as they are formed and dispersed. Such seeds are said to have 
a dormant period and germinate only when this has elapsed. Dormancy may be imposed within the 
seed, due to:
l	 incomplete seed development that causes the embryo to be immature, and which is overcome 
in time
l	 the presence of a plant growth regulator – abscisic acid, for example – that inhibits 
development, and which only disappears from the seed tissues with time
l	 an impervious seed coat that is eventually made permeable – for example, by abrasion with 
coarse soil or by the action of micro-organisms
l	 a requirement for pre-chilling under moist conditions before the seed can germinate; some 
seeds need to be held at or below 5 °C for up to 50 days (possibly the equivalent of winter in 
temperate climates).
Once dormancy is overcome, germination occurs if the following essential external conditions are 
met (Table D3.1.2):
l	 water uptake has occurred, so that the seed is fully hydrated and the embryo can be 
physiologically active
l	 oxygen is present at a high enough partial pressure to sustain aerobic respiration; growth 
demands a continuous supply of metabolic energy in the form of ATP that is best generated by 
aerobic cell respiration in all the cells
l	 a suitable temperature exists, one that is close to the optimum temperature for the enzymes 
involved in the mobilization of stored food reserves, the translocation of organic solutes in the 
phloem, and the synthesis of intermediates for cell growth and development. For example, wheat 
seeds germinate in the range 1–35 °C, and maize in the range 5–45 °C.
 
■Table D3.1.2 Conditions for germination
External
Internal
water uptake – hydration of the 
cytoplasm of cells of the embryo
overcoming of dormancy
ambient temperature – within optimum 
range for enzyme action
production of plant growth regulator(s) by embryo cells to initiate 
biochemical changes of germination, leading to production of 
hydrolytic enzymes for mobilization of stored food
oxygen – to sustain aerobic cell respiration
respiration provides ATP for growth and metabolic processes
	
◆Germination: the 
resumption of growth 
by an embryonic plant 
in seed or fruit, at the 
expense of stored food.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
708
In germination, food reserves are mobilized (i.e. stored food such as starch is made available to the 
growing embryo). The steps of germination are summarized in Figure D3.1.16. Note that a 
particular plant growth substance (known as gibberellic acid, GA) is produced by the cells of the 
embryo. This growth-promoting substance passes to the food stored in the cotyledons. Here, 
protein reserves are converted to hydrolytic enzymes that mobilize the stored food reserves. 
The main event is the production of the enzyme amylase, which hydrolyses starch to maltose. 
This disaccharide is then hydrolysed to glucose. The resulting soluble sugar (and other compounds) 
sustain respiration and also provide the building blocks for synthesis of the intermediates essential 
for new cells.
favourable
temperature
adequate
oxygen
1  water absorption
    (eventually causes
    testa to split)
next, within the embryo:
2  embryo produces GA
4  hydrolytic enzymes are produced,
    converting stored starch → glucose, 
    and proteins → amino acids 
5  glucose and amino acids
    are translocated to growing
    points of stem and root
3  GA passes to
    food storage cells
7  seedling emerges and
    eventually becomes a 
    self-sufﬁcient, autotrophic
    plant
6  growth and development
    occur in stem and root
 
■Figure D3.1.16 Metabolic events of germination in a starchy seed
5	 Define the term 
germination.
6	 Explain the 
factors needed for 
germination.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
709
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Design an experiment to investigate the effect of an 
independent variable on the germination of seeds (the 
dependent variable). Identify and justify the choice of 
dependent and control variables. 
Samples of seeds can be set to germinate on damp 
filter paper in a Petri dish, but how many seeds per 
dish would make an appropriate sample, and how 
many different species might you test? Given this 
simple apparatus, you would be able to investigate 
the effect of light (presence or absence), and perhaps 
temperature (low and room temperatures – unless you 
also have access to temperature-controlled cabinets). 
More ambitious investigations might look at the effects 
of intense cold treatment on newly formed seeds, 
or the effects of brief and prolonged pre-soaking (in 
effect, the degree of hydration). 
Which variables would you keep the same (control 
variables)? These are variables that could affect your 
dependent variable. How would you control these 
variables? For example, keeping the seedlings in a 
temperature-controlled greenhouse would enable you 
to keep the temperature the same.
Whatever is investigated, there is the issue of the 
percentage of seeds in a sample that might be long-
term dormant or non-viable.
7	 An experiment was carried out to investigate the factors needed for germination. 
Figure D3.1.17 shows the results of the experiment.
moist
moist
B
C
D
E
warm
warm
warm
warm
oxygen
present
oxygen
present
no
oxygen
oxygen
present
no light
pyrogallol (absorbs oxygen)
oxygen
present
5°C
A
dry
moist
moist
 
■Figure D3.1.17 Experiment investigating the factors needed for germination
a	 Analyse the results shown by the experiment. 
b	 Explain why germination has occurred in tubes D and E but not the others.
Control of the developmental changes of 
puberty by GnRH and steroid sex hormones
During the first 10 years of life, the human reproductive systems remain in a juvenile state. Then, at 
puberty, the secondary sexual characteristics begin to develop. This is a time of growth and 
development at the beginning of sexual maturation. Now, there is a significant increase in the 
production of the sex hormones by the gonads – testosterone in cells of the testes, and oestradiol and 
progesterone in cells of the ovaries. These hormones are chemically very similar molecules; they are 
manufactured from the steroid cholesterol that is both made in the liver and absorbed as part of the 
diet. (Steroids are a form of lipid, page 204.) 
	
◆Puberty: the stage in 
life when an individual 
becomes sexually mature, 
marking the transition 
from childhood to 
adulthood.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
710
Perhaps the most noticeable effect of the increased secretion of the sex hormones is the stimulation 
they cause in muscle protein formation and bone growth. Because of this effect, testosterone, 
oestradiol and progesterone are known as anabolic steroids (anabolic means ‘build up’). The effects 
of the female sex hormones are less marked in this respect than those of testosterone in the male. 
The onset of puberty occurs, on average, about two years earlier in females. 
 
■Table D3.1.3 Secondary sexual characteristics
Secondary sexual characteristics of a 
human female
Secondary sexual characteristics of a 
human male
•	
maturation of the ovaries and enlargement of the 
vagina and uterus
•	
development of the breasts
•	
widening of the pelvis
•	
growth of pubic hair and underarm hair
•	
monthly ovulation and menstruation
•	
changes in behaviour associated with a sex drive
•	
development and enlargement of the testes, 
scrotum, penis and glands of the reproductive 
tract
•	
increased skeletal muscle development; 
enlargement of the larynx, deepening of 
the voice
•	
growth of pubic hair, underarm hair and 
body hair
•	
continuous production of sperm and, in the 
absence of sexual intercourse, occasional 
erections and the discharge of seminal fluid
•	
changes in behaviour associated with a sex drive
The onset of puberty is triggered by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. Here, production 
and secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) causes the nearby pituitary gland (the 
‘master’ endocrine gland) to produce and release two hormones into the blood circulation: follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). They were named because their roles 
in sexual development were discovered in the female, although they do operate in both sexes. Their 
first effects are to enhance secretions of the sex hormones. Then, in the presence of FSH, LH and the 
respective sex hormones, there follows the development of the secondary sexual characteristics and 
the preparation of the body for its role in sexual reproduction.
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis in humans
Gametogenesis is the formation of gametes by mitosis first of all, to proliferate cells that will then 
undergo meiosis. In order to understand the process of gametogenesis in males and females, further 
detail of the meiotic divisions need to be understood.
 
■The process of meiosis
Once started, meiosis proceeds steadily as a continuous process of nuclear division. The steps of 
meiosis are explained in four distinct phases (prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase), 
but this is just for convenience of analysis and description – there are no breaks between the phases 
in nuclear division. There are two divisions: meiosis I and meiosis II (see Figure D3.1.18). Both 
follow the same stages. The arrival of homologous chromosomes at opposite poles signals the end of 
meiosis I. Meiosis II is remarkably similar to mitosis.
The behaviour of the chromosomes in the phases of meiosis is shown in Figure D3.1.18. For clarity, 
the drawings show a cell with a single pair of homologous chromosomes. 
	
◆Gonadotropin-
releasing hormone 
(GnRH): hormone that 
causes the pituitary gland 
to secrete luteinizing 
hormone (LH) and follicle-
stimulating hormone 
(FSH).
	
◆Gametogenesis: the 
production of sex cells 
(gametes).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
711
prophase I (mid)
Homologous chromosomes pair 
up (becoming bivalents) as they 
continue to shorten and thicken. 
Centrioles duplicate.
metaphase I
Nuclear membrane breaks down. 
Spindle forms. Bivalents line up 
at the equator, attached by 
centromeres. At the end of 
metaphase I, members of the 
bivalents start to repel each other 
and separate, but are still held 
together by one or more 
chiasmata.
telophase I
Nuclear membrane re-forms 
around the daughter nuclei. The 
chromosome number has been 
halved. The chromosomes start 
to decondense. Spindle breaks 
down. These two cells do not 
enter interphase, but continue 
into meiosis II.
metaphase II
The nuclear membrane breaks 
down and the spindle apparatus 
reforms (at right angles to the 
original spindle). The 
chromosomes attach by their 
centromere to spindle ﬁbres at 
the equator of the spindle.
prophase I (early)
Chromosomes begin to condense 
(shorten and thicken) and become 
visible with a light microscope.
prophase I (late)
Chromosomes can now be seen to 
consist of chromatids. Sites where 
chromatids have broken and 
rejoined, causing crossing-over, are 
visible as chiasmata.
anaphase I
Homologous chromosomes 
separate. Whole chromosomes are 
pulled towards opposite poles of the 
spindle, centromere ﬁrst (dragging 
along the chromatids). Individual 
chromatids remain attached by 
centromeres. Meiosis I has separated 
homologous pairs of chromosomes, 
but not sister chromatids.
prophase II
The chromosomes condense 
(shorten and re-thicken by 
coiling). Centrioles duplicate and 
move to the poles.
anaphase II
The centromeres divide and the 
chromatids are pulled to 
opposite poles of the spindle, 
centromeres ﬁrst.
telophase II
The chromatids (now called 
chromosomes) decondense. 
The nuclear membrane re-forms. 
Nucleoli reform. There are now 
four cells, each with half the 
chromosome number of the 
original parent cell.
MEIOSIS I 
MEIOSIS II
there is no interphase between MEIOSIS I and MEIOSIS II
 
■Figure D3.1.18 The stages of meiosis


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
712
 
■Gametogenesis
In gametogenesis, many gametes are produced, although relatively few of them are ever used in 
reproduction. The processes of gamete formation in testes and ovaries have a common sequence 
of phases. 
First, there is a multiplication phase in which the gamete mother cells divide by mitotic cell division 
(Figure D2.1.8, page 654). This division is then repeated to produce many cells with the potential to 
become gametes. Secondly, each developing sex cell undergoes a growth phase. Third, and finally, 
comes the maturation phase. This involves meiosis and results in the formation of the haploid gametes. 
The products of meiosis I are secondary spermatocytes and secondary oocytes, and the products of 
meiosis II are spermatids and ova. The steps of meiosis are described in Figure D3.1.18.
These phases in sperm and ova production are summarized in Figure D3.1.19.
multiplication phase
spermatogenesis
multiplication
repeated mitotic cell division
oogenesis
of seminiferous
tubule
oocyte mother cell
of ovary
germinal epithelium
cell (2n)
sperm mother cell
many cells formed
secondary
spermatocytes (n)
spermatids
sperm (n) 
ovum (n) 
second polar
body
secondary
oocyte (n) 
ﬁrst polar
body (division
unequal)
meiosis I
meiosis II
growth phase
maturation phase
 
■Figure D3.1.19 The phases and changes during gametogenesis
Figure D3.1.19 shows how gametogenesis results in different numbers of sperm and eggs, and different 
amounts of cytoplasm in the oocytes, ovum and polar bodies (see also Chapter D2.1, page 649).
 
■Spermatogenesis
The structure and functioning of the testis
In the human foetus, testes develop high on the posterior abdominal wall and migrate to the 
scrotum in about the seventh month of pregnancy. In the scrotum, the paired testes are held at a 
temperature 2–3 °C below body temperature after birth. This lower temperature is eventually 
necessary for sperm production – testes that fail to migrate do not later produce sperm.
Spermatogenesis begins in the testes at puberty and continues throughout life. Each testis consists 
of many seminiferous tubules. These are lined by germinal epithelial cells that divide repeatedly. 
Tubules drain into a system of channels leading to the epididymis, a much-coiled tube that leads to 
the sperm duct. Between the individual seminiferous tubules is connective tissue containing blood 
capillaries, together with groups of interstitial cells. These latter cells are hormone secreting (the 
testis is also an endocrine gland). Testes are suspended by a spermatic cord containing the sperm 
duct and blood vessels (Figure D3.1.4). 
Link
Examples of unequal 
division of cytoplasm 
between daughter 
cells is covered 
in Chapter D2.1, 
page 649.
	
◆Spermatogenesis: 
the production of sperm 
in the testes.
	
◆Seminiferous 
tubule: elongated tubes 
in the testes, the site of 
sperm production.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
713
In the seminiferous tubules, the germinal epithelial cells are attached to the 
basement membrane, along with the nutritive cells. Cells from the subsequent 
steps of sperm production (spermatogonia, primary spermatocytes, secondary 
spermatocytes and spermatids – see Table D3.1.4 below) occur lodged in the 
surface of the Sertoli cells. Sertoli cells are large cells in the seminiferous lining that 
nourish the developing sperm and on which they are dependent until they mature 
into spermatozoa (Figures D3.1.20 and D3.1.21). Figure D3.1.19 and Table D3.1.4 
show the stages typical of nuclear division and the different stages that lead to the 
development of mature sperm.
position of germinal
epithelium
position of interstitial cells
(secrete testosterone)
position of
spermatids
position of nutritive cells
with sperm mother cells
secondary spermatocytes
position of
basement membrane
 
■Figure D3.1.20 Photomicrograph of testis tissue in section, and interpretive drawing
	
◆Spermatogonia: male germ cells (stem 
cells) which make up the inner layer of the 
lining of the seminiferous tubules, and give 
rise to spermatocytes by mitosis.
	
◆Spermatocyte: cell formed in 
seminiferous tubules of testes; develops into 
sperm.
	
◆Spermatid: cells derived from secondary 
spermatocytes in the second meiotic division, 
which then differentiate into mature sperm.
connective tissue,
blood capillaries and
interstitial cells
seminiferous tubules
 – site of sperm
    production
sperm duct
epididymis (uncoiled)
spermatozoa
secondary
spermatocytes
primary
spermatocytes
spermatids
spermatogonia
nutritive cell
(Sertoli cell)
basement
membrane
testis in section
(part dissected)
part of a
seminiferous
tubule in TS
epididymis (uncoiled)
photomicrograph of TS of seminiferous tubule, HP (×1000)
 
■Figure D3.1.21 Structure of a seminiferous 
tubule – site of sperm production


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
714
Table D3.1.4 summarizes the stages of sperm development, including the type and stage of 
cell division.
 
■Table D3.1.4 The stages of sperm development
Cells 
Type and stage of cell division
spermatogonium
2n (diploid) cells made by mitosis from cells lining the seminiferous tubules 
primary spermatocyte
2n cells produced by mitosis of above
undergoes meiosis to make secondary spermatocyte
secondary spermatocyte
n (haploid) cells made from first meiotic division
spermatid
n cells made from second meiotic division
spermatozoon/sperm
n spermatids differentiate into mature spermatozoa 
The mature sperm, and the production of semen
The sperm are immobile when first formed. From the seminiferous tubules, they pass into the 
much-coiled epididymis, where maturation is completed and storage occurs. During an ejaculation, 
the sperm are moved by waves of contraction in the muscular walls of the sperm ducts. Sperm are 
transported in a nutritive fluid that is secreted by glands, mainly the seminal vesicles and prostate 
gland. These glands add their secretions just at the point where the sperm ducts join with the 
urethra, below the base of the penis (Figure D3.1.4, page 696). As well as providing nutrients for the 
sperm, semen is a slightly alkaline fluid, the significance of which we will return to later. During an 
ejaculation, the sphincter muscle at the base of the bladder is closed. 
Common mistake
Do not confuse the production of semen with spermatogenesis. Semen is sperm and the fluid from 
the prostate and seminal vesicles that the sperm travel in, while spermatogenesis is the process of 
sperm formation.
The roles of hormones in spermatogenesis 
In male puberty, a hormone from the hypothalamus triggers the secretion of FSH and LH by the 
anterior lobe of the pituitary. The first effect of FSH is to initiate sperm production in the testes. 
LH stimulates the endocrine cells of the testes to secrete testosterone. Subsequently, testosterone 
and FSH together maintain continued sperm production and growth of the essential Sertoli cells that 
support sperm with nutrients as they grow and develop in the testes.
Subsequently, secretion of testosterone continues throughout life. Over-secretion of testosterone is 
regulated by negative feedback control, as an excessively high level of testosterone in the blood 
inhibits secretion of LH. Only when the concentration of LH in the blood has fallen significantly, will 
testosterone production recommence. (Similarly, over-activity of the nutritive cells inhibits secretion 
of FSH for a while.)
 
■Oogenesis
In the female, the ovaries are about 3 cm long and 1.5 cm thick. These paired structures are 
suspended by ligaments near the base of the abdominal cavity. As well as producing egg cells, the 
ovaries are endocrine glands. They secrete the female sex hormones oestradiol and progesterone. 
A pair of oviducts extend from the uterus and open as funnels close to the ovaries. The oviducts 
transport oocytes and are the site of fertilization. In the event of fertilization, development of the 
foetus will occur in the uterus.
Common 
mistake
The words 
spermatogonia, 
spermatocyte, and 
spermatid, and the 
different stages of 
meiosis they relate to, 
are sometimes not 
used when describing 
spermatogenesis – they 
should be!
Link
The structure 
of a mature 
sperm is shown 
in Chapter B2.3, 
page 271.
8	 Draw and 
annotate a 
diagram of a 
mature sperm cell.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
715
The steps of oogenesis occur in the ovary. Ovulation, the process by which an egg is released to the 
oviduct, occurs at the secondary oocyte stage. Development of a secondary oocyte into an ovum is 
triggered in the oviduct, if fertilization occurs. Consequently, a thin section through a mature ovary, 
examined by light microscopy, shows the developing oocytes at differing stages (Figure D3.1.22).
developing
follicles
position
of germinal
epithelium
corpus luteum
(remains of follicle
now an endocrine
gland)
follicle possibly about
to rupture and release
secondary oocyte
immature primary
follicles in cortex
position of
blood supply
 
■Figure D3.1.22 Photomicrograph of an ovary in section, and interpretive drawing
The structure of the ovary and the steps of oogenesis
Oogenesis begins in the ovaries of the foetus before birth, but the final development of oocytes is 
only completed in adult life (Figure D3.1.23). The germinal epithelium, which lines the outer surface 
of the ovary, divides by mitotic cell division (page 653) to form numerous oogonia. These cells 
migrate into the connective tissue of the ovary, where they grow and enlarge to form oocytes. 
Each oocyte becomes surrounded by layers of follicle cells, and the whole structure is called a 
primary follicle. 
By mid-pregnancy, production of oogonia in the foetus ceases – by this stage there are several 
million in each ovary. Very many degenerate, a process that continues throughout life. At the onset of 
puberty, the number of primary oocytes remaining is about 250 000. Fewer than 1% of these follicles 
will complete their development; the remainder never become secondary oocytes or ova.
Between puberty in females (at about 11 years old) and the cessation of ovulation at menopause 
(typically at about 55 years old), primary follicles begin to develop further. Several start growth 
each month, but usually only one matures. Development involves progressive enlargement and, at 
the same time, the follicles move to the outer part of the ovary. The primary follicle then undergoes 
meiosis I (page 656), but the cytoplasmic division that follows is unequal, forming a tiny polar body 
and a secondary oocyte (Figure B2.3.18, page 272). The second meiotic division, meiosis II, then 
begins, but it does not go to completion. In this condition the egg cell (it is still a secondary oocyte) 
is released from the ovary (ovulation), by rupture of the follicle wall (Figure D3.1.23). 
	
◆Oogenesis: the 
development of an ovum.
	
◆Oogonia: immature 
female sex cell in the 
process of developing into 
an oocyte.
	
◆Oocyte: a female 
sex cell in the process 
of a meiotic division to 
become an ovum.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
716
ovum (n)
second
polar
body
secondary
oocyte (n)
ﬁrst
polar
body
primary
oocyte (2n)
oogonium
primary follicle
(oocyte surrounded
by a layer of
follicle cells)
oogonia grow
to become oocytes
germinal 
epithelium – 
oogonia 
formed by 
mitosis in 
ovaries during 
development 
of foetus 
(in uterus)
corpus luteum
degenerates
quickly
if fertilization
does not
occur
remains of follicle
now develops
into endocrine gland
(corpus luteum)
follicle bursts at ovulation
and egg cell (secondary
oocyte) released (surrounded
by follicle cells – Figure B2.3.18
secondary oocyte in mature
ovarian follicle (also known as
Graaﬁan follicle), with layers of
follicle cells and ﬂuid early in
prophase of meiosis II (further
development is then suspended
until arrival of sperm – in oviduct)
each menstrual cycle a few primary
follicles start to develop – meiosis I
is completed, forming a secondary
oocyte and the ﬁrst polar
body (unequal division
of cytoplasm) which
fails to develop
further
diagrammatic representation of the sequence of events
in the formation of a secondary oocyte for release
and the subsequent changes in the ovary
summary of changes
from oogonium to ovum
– steps in the growth
and maturation phases
of gametogenesis
in the ovary
growth
maturation
meiosis I
meiosis II
Secondary oocyte
begins meiosis II but
this does not complete
until sperm nucleus
penetrates cytoplasm
of oocyte.
 
■Figure D3.1.23 The ovary, and stages in oogenesis
Ovulation occurs from one of the two ovaries about once every 28 days. Meanwhile, the remains of 
the primary follicle immediately develops into the yellow body, the corpus luteum (page 699). This is 
an additional but temporary endocrine gland, with a role to play if fertilization occurs (see below).
Mechanisms to prevent polyspermy
One or more of the few sperm that reach a secondary oocyte pass between the follicle cells 
surrounding the oocyte. The entry of more than one sperm into the oocyte is known as 
polyspermy. Fertilization involves a mechanism that prevents polyspermy. Look at the steps to 
fertilization in Figure D3.1.24.
First, the coat that surrounds the oocyte, which is made of glycoprotein and is called the zona 
pellucida, must be crossed. At the tip of the sperm is a membrane-bound sac of hydrolytic 
enzymes called the acrosome. When in contact with the zona pellucida, these enzymes are 
released and digest a pathway for the sperm to the oocyte membrane – a process known as the 
acrosome reaction. 
Next the plasma membrane around the head of a sperm fuses with the plasma membrane of 
the oocyte. The male nucleus enters the oocyte. As this happens, cortical granules in the outer 
cytoplasm of the oocyte release their contents outside the oocyte by exocytosis. This is known 
as the cortical reaction. The result is that the oocyte plasma membrane cannot be crossed by 
another sperm. This prevents the possibility of fusion of more than one male nucleus with the 
oocyte nucleus.
As the sperm nucleus enters the oocyte, completion of meiosis II is triggered and the second polar 
body is released. The male and female haploid nuclei come together to form the diploid nucleus of 
the zygote. Fertilization is completed.
9	 Distinguish 
between 
spermatogenesis 
and oogenesis.
	
◆Polyspermy: 
fertilization of an egg by 
many sperm.
	
◆Zona pellucida: 
protective glycoprotein 
layer; jelly coat of egg. 
After entry of one sperm 
it becomes stronger and 
no more sperm can enter.
	
◆Acrosome: sac at 
head of sperm containing 
protease enzymes.
	
◆Cortical reaction: 
prevents polyspermy 
during fertilization.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
717
the stages of fertilization
(acrosome reaction)
follicle cells
(nourish the oocyte)
jelly coat
(zona pellucida)
plasma
membrane
cortical granules
cytoplasm
nucleus
polar body
path of sperm
between follicle cells
this human spermatozoon has just
penetrated the zona pellucida (×  3200)
plasma membrane
of oocyte
jelly coat
cytoplasm with
cortical granules
1
2
3
4
5
haploid female 
nucleus
1 sperm passes between the follicle
cells and arrives at the jelly coat
surrounding the secondary oocyte
2 ‘capacitation’: changes to the
surface of the head of the sperm,
releasing hydrolytic enzymes
enzyme digestion creates a
tiny path for sperm to reach
the plasma membrane of the
secondary oocyte
3
4 fusion of the plasma membranes
of secondary oocyte and sperm
5 cortical granules in outer layers of
cytoplasm of secondary oocyte pass
across plasma membrane by exocytosis,
preventing entry of a second sperm
6 nucleus of secondary oocyte is
stimulated to complete meiosis II
8 the nucleus 
undergoes mitosis
9 division of the 
cytoplasm follows, 
forming the ﬁrst 
two diploid cells of 
the embryo
haploid male 
nucleus
polar bodies
(cortical reaction)
7 nuclei fuse to form diploid nucleus; 
polar bodies break down
 
■Figure D3.1.24 Fertilization of a human secondary oocyte


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
718
Development of a blastocyst and 
implantation in the endometrium
Fertilization occurs in the upper oviduct. As the zygote is transported down the oviduct by ciliary 
action, mitosis and cell division commence. The process of the division of the zygote into a mass of 
daughter cells is known as cleavage. This is the first stage in the growth and development of a new 
individual. The embryo does not increase in mass at this stage. By the time the embryo has reached 
the uterus, it is a solid ball of tiny cells. Division continues and the cells organize themselves into a 
fluid-filled ball, the blastocyst.
In humans, by day 7, the blastocyst consists of about 100 cells. It now starts to become embedded in 
the endometrium, a process known as implantation. Implantation takes from day 7 to day 14, 
approximately. At this stage, some of the blastocyst appears grouped as the inner cell mass and 
these cells will eventually become the foetus. Other parts of the blastocyst become the placenta. 
Once implanted, the embryo starts to receive nutrients directly from the endometrium of the uterus 
wall (Figure D3.1.25).
oviduct
ovary
uterus
cervix
steps in early cleavage
2-cell stage
8-cell stage
solid ball of cells
blastocyst
may be
implanted
here
cervix
wall of uterus:
  endometrium
  muscular wall
corpus
luteum
developing
follicle
ovary
egg cell
surrounded by
follicle cells
fertilized
egg cell
ovulation
occurred
here
oviduct
blastocyst
 
■Figure D3.1.25 The site of fertilization and early stages of development
Link
The term blastocyst is 
defined and covered 
in Chapter B2.3, 
page 257.
	
◆Implantation: 
embedding of the 
blastocyst (developed 
from the fertilized ovum) 
in the uterus wall.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
719
Common mistake
When discussing the stages of fertilization, make sure you focus on the relevant detail. The events of 
fertilization are considered to start with the arrival of sperm at the surface of the oocyte, including 
the acrosome reaction and the cortical reaction.
Pregnancy testing by detection of human 
chorionic gonadotropin secretion
If the egg is fertilized (the start of a pregnancy) the developing embryo secretes a hormone, hCG 
(human chorionic gonadotropin), that circulates in the blood and maintains the corpus luteum 
(Figure D3.1.23) as an endocrine gland for at least 16 weeks of pregnancy. When the corpus 
luteum eventually breaks down, the placenta takes over as an endocrine gland, secreting oestradiol, 
progesterone and hCG. These hormones continue to prevent ovulation and maintain the endometrium.
 
■Monoclonal antibodies
White blood cells in the blood provide our main defences against invasion of the body by harmful 
micro-organisms (Chapter C3.2, page 522). Antibodies are effective in the destruction of antigens 
within the body, but the plasma cells (the product of a B-lymphocyte, Figure C3.2.7, page 527) that 
secrete them have an extremely short lifespan and cannot, themselves, divide. As a consequence, 
antibodies cannot be used outside the body.
Monoclonal antibodies are the product through which antibodies are made available in the long 
term, for applications in entirely new circumstances. A monoclonal antibody is a single antibody that 
is stable and that can be used over a period of time. Each specific antibody is made by one particular 
type of B-cell. The problem of the normally brief existence of a plasma cell is overcome by fusing the 
specific lymphocyte with a cancer cell – which, unlike other body cells, goes on dividing indefinitely. 
The resulting hybrid cell, known as a hybridoma cell, divides to form a clone of cells that persists 
and which conveniently goes on secreting the antibody in significant quantities. Hybridoma cells are 
virtually immortal, provided they are kept in a suitable environment. 
 
■Pregnancy testing
Monoclonal antibodies are used in pregnancy testing. A pregnant person has a significant 
concentration of the hormone hCG in their urine, whereas a non-pregnant person has a negligible 
amount. Monoclonal antibodies to hCG have been engineered to carry (become attached to) 
coloured granules, so that in a simple test kit the appearance of a coloured strip in one compartment 
provides immediate and visual confirmation of pregnancy. How this works is illustrated in 
Figure D3.1.26.
	
◆Monoclonal 
antibody: antibody 
produced by a single 
clone of B-lymphocytes; 
it consists of a 
population of identical 
antibody molecules.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
720
pregnancy testing kit
how the positive test result is brought about
compartment with immobile antibodies to
the coloured granule–hCG monoclonal
antibody complex
a blue colour appears here
when the test has completed
correctly
compartment with immobile
hCG monoclonal antibodies
compartment with mobile hCG monoclonal
antibodies with blue coloured granules attached
wick dipped into
urine sample
movement of urine
by capillary action
a blue colour appears here if the 
urine contains hCG (= pregnant)
immobile antibodies to
coloured granule–hCG 
antibody complex
hCG attaches to mobile hCG 
antibodies with coloured granules
immobile hCG  
antibodies
mobile hCG antibodies
with blue coloured
granules attached
urine with hCG moving
up the test strip
immobile antibodies trap the mobile
hCG antibodies with coloured granules,
so a blue colour appears in window
excess mobile hCG antibodies with
coloured granules move on up the test
strip and combine with the immobile
antibodies here, giving a second blue
colour confirming the test is completed
(this colour appears whether or not
there is hCG in the urine)
these steps
take only a
few minutes
 
■Figure D3.1.26 Detecting pregnancy using monoclonal antibodies


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
721
Role of the placenta in foetal 
development inside the uterus
From early in the development of the embryo, this tiny and delicate structure is contained, 
supported and protected by a membranous, fluid-filled sac. It is the outer layers of the tissues of the 
embryo that grow and give rise to the membranes and that also form the placenta (see below).  
By the end of two months’ development, the beginnings of the principal adult organs can be detected 
within the embryo and the placenta is operational. During the rest of gestation, the developing 
offspring is called a foetus. The placenta allows the foetus to be retained in the uterus to a later stage 
of development than in mammals that do not develop a placenta (such as marsupials, for example 
the kangaroo and wombat).
placenta
umbilical cord
     
 
■Figure D3.1.27 
Human embryo at 
the six-week stage
 
■The placenta – structure and function
The placenta is a disc-shaped structure composed of maternal (endometrial) and foetal membrane 
tissues. Here the maternal and foetal blood circulations are brought very close together over a huge 
surface area, but they do not mix. Placenta and foetus are connected by arteries and a vein in the 
umbilical cord (Figure D3.1.28). 
Exchange in the placenta is by diffusion and active transport. Movements across the placenta involve:
l	 respiratory gases, which are exchanged; oxygen diffuses across the placenta from the maternal 
haemoglobin to the foetal haemoglobin, and carbon dioxide diffuses in the opposite direction
l	 water, which crosses the placenta by osmosis; glucose, which crosses by facilitated diffusion; and 
ions and amino acids, which are transported actively
l	 excretory products, including urea, leaving the foetus
l	 antibodies present in the mother’s blood, which freely cross the placenta, so the foetus is initially 
protected from the same diseases as the mother (passive immunity, page 541). 
The placenta is a barrier to bacteria, although some viruses can cross it.
Top tip!
The placenta is adapted for diffusion in much the same way as other exchange organs. 
l	 It has a large surface area (with lots of villi-like projections).
l	 It is only a few cells thick, so there is a short diffusion pathway.
l	 It has a constant blood supply that maintains the concentration gradient between the mother’s 
blood and the blood of the foetus.
	
◆Placenta: a temporary 
organ that joins the 
mother and foetus, 
transferring oxygen and 
nutrients from the mother 
to the foetus, with carbon 
dioxide and other waste 
material transported from 
foetus to mother.
	
◆Gestation: the period 
of development in the 
mother’s body, lasting 
from conception to birth.
Top tip!
The distinction 
between embryo and 
foetus is made based 
on the amount of time 
spent in the uterus. 
An embryo is the 
early stage of human 
development in which 
organs and other 
critical body structures 
are formed. An embryo 
is termed a foetus 
from the 11th week of 
pregnancy, i.e. the 9th 
week of development 
after fertilization of 
the egg.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
722
uterus wall
human foetus with placenta, about 10 weeks
part of the placenta
in section
oviduct
uterus cavity
foetus
chorion
amnion
amniotic ﬂuid
umbilical cord
placenta
villi of placenta
space (lacuna) ﬁlled
with maternal blood
umbilical
vein
umbilical
arteries
ﬁnger-like surfaces
(villi) of the placenta,
with foetal arteries
and foetal veins
maternal
tissue of
endometrium
maternal
arteries
and veins
surface area for
exchange of nutrients
and waste materials
 
■Figure D3.1.28 The placenta – site of exchange between maternal and foetal circulations
Hormonal control of pregnancy and childbirth
 
■Pregnancy
The placenta is also an endocrine gland, initially producing an additional sex hormone human 
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). hCG appears in the urine from about seven days after conception. 
We have already noted that it is the presence of hCG in a sample of urine that is detected using 
monoclonal antibodies in a pregnancy-testing kit (Figure D3.1.26).
hCG is initially secreted by the cells of the blastocyst, but later it comes entirely from the placenta. 
The role of hCG is to maintain the corpus luteum as an endocrine gland (secreting progesterone) for 
the first 16 weeks of pregnancy. When the corpus luteum eventually does break down, the placenta 
secretes oestradiol and progesterone (Figure D3.1.29). Progesterone maintains the lining of the 
uterus, and therefore maintains the continuation of the pregnancy. Without maintenance of these 
hormone levels, conditions favourable to a foetus are not maintained in the uterus and a spontaneous 
abortion results.
10	Suggest why it 
is so important 
that the blood of 
the mother and 
offspring do not 
mix together in 
the placenta.
11	List the structural 
features of the 
placenta that 
contribute to 
efficient exchange 
and explain why 
each is important. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.1   Reproduction
723
 
■Childbirth
Immediately before birth, the level of progesterone declines sharply. As a result, progesterone-driven 
inhibition of contraction of the muscle of the uterus wall is removed. 
At the same time, the posterior pituitary begins to release a hormone, oxytocin (Figure D3.1.29). 
This relaxes the elastic fibres that join the bones of the pelvic girdle, especially at the front, and thus 
aids dilation of the cervix for the head (the widest part of the offspring) to pass through. Oxytocin 
also stimulates rhythmic contractions of the muscles of the uterus wall. Subsequently, control of 
contractions during birth occurs via a positive feedback loop (Figure D3.1.30). The resulting 
powerful, intermittent waves of contraction of the muscles of the uterus wall start at the top of the 
uterus and move towards the cervix. Progressively during this process (known as labour), the rate 
and strength of the contractions increase, until they expel the offspring. 
Finally, less powerful uterine contractions separate the placenta from the endometrium and cause 
the discharge of the placenta and remains of the umbilicus (called the afterbirth).
	
◆Oxytocin: hormone 
released by the pituitary 
gland that causes 
increased contraction 
of the uterus during 
childbirth.
Link
Other examples of 
positive feedback 
loops are in Chapters 
C3.1, page 516, 
and Chapter D4.3, 
page 825.
contractions of the wall of the uterus
force the baby’s head into the cervix
stretching of
the cervix
stimulation of
stretch-sensitive
receptors in the cervix
brain – control centre
posterior pituitary gland
releases oxytocin
muscles in wall of uterus
contract more forcefully
further stretching
of cervix
birth
decreased stretching of cervix
breaks the positive feedback cycle
oxytocin release by 
posterior pituitary 
terminated
increased stretching 
of cervix
triggers release of
more oxytocin
=
positive feedback loop
 
■Figure D3.1.30 The positive feedback 
loop in the control of childbirth
corpus 
luteum
blood level of hormone/arbitrary units
gestation/weeks
24
  hCG
(initially from blastocyst, later
from placenta) 
uterus wall
with
substantial
endometrium
maintain
endometrium
  progesterone
(initially from corpus
luteum, later from
placenta)
 oestradiol
(initially from
corpus luteum, 
later from placenta)  
  oxytocin
(from pituitary
gland)
28
32
36
40
20
16
12
8
4
0
placenta
ovary
oestradiol and 
progesterone
weeks 16–40
human chorionic gonadotrophin
(hCG) maintains corpus luteum
as endocrine gland for ﬁrst 
16 weeks of pregnancy
 
■Figure D3.1.29 Blood levels of sex hormones during gestation


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
724
Hormone replacement therapy and 
the risk of coronary heart disease 
Menstruation typically ceases between the ages of 45–55. A person is said to be in menopause 
when they have not had a period for 12 months in a row. Menopause results from the ovaries 
reducing the production of oestradiol and progesterone, which regulate the menstrual cycle, and 
fertility declines. After the menopause, the ovaries no longer respond to stimulation by FSH and LH 
(the pituitary gland hormones) and stop releasing eggs and oestradiol. Due to lower oestradiol and 
progesterone levels, there is a loss of negative feedback to the pituitary gland.
Oestradiol affects many parts of the body, including the blood vessels, heart, bone, uterus, urinary 
system, skin and brain. Loss of oestradiol is believed to be the cause of many of the symptoms 
associated with menopause, which include brief, periodic increases in body temperature, an 
increased heart rate, sudden perspiration as the body tries to reduce its temperature, joint and 
muscle stiffness, and changes in concentration levels. 
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a treatment used to relieve the symptoms of menopause 
by replacing the female hormones oestradiol and progesterone. HRT can be taken as tablets, patches, 
creams or gels, under advice from a doctor.
Nature of science: Patterns and trends
There are marked variations in the prevalence of different health problems in societies around the 
world. Claims are based on:
l	 epidemiological studies – these provide circumstantial evidence of health risks; they suggest 
connections but do not establish a cause or biochemical connection
l	 clinical studies of individual patients with health problems, which attempt to show causal 
relations between diseases and diets, for example (however, it is not possible to carry out 
‘controlled’ experiments for ethical reasons).
Epidemiological studies have been used to monitor the outcomes of hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT) on the incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD). In early epidemiological studies, it was 
argued that women undergoing HRT had reduced incidence of CHD and this was deemed to be a 
cause-and-effect relationship. 
A randomized control trial is a test in which subjects are randomly assigned to one of two 
groups: one (the experimental group), which receives the intervention that is being tested, and 
the other (the comparison group or control) receiving an alternative (conventional) treatment. 
The two groups are then subsequently tested to see if there are any differences between them in 
outcome. The results and subsequent analysis of the trial are used to assess the effectiveness of the 
treatment. 
Randomized controlled trials followed on from earlier epidemiological studies and showed that the 
use of HRT led to a small increase in the risk of CHD. The correlation between HRT and decreased 
incidence of CHD is therefore not actually a cause-and-effect relationship. HRT patients have a 
higher socioeconomic status (SES), and this status has a causal relationship with lower risk of 
CHD. The link between higher household income and uptake of HRT is uncertain, although one 
hypothesis is that women with high SES use health services more comprehensively and regularly 
than those from lower income families, and so are more likely to take up preventative health 
measures such as HRT. 
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How can interspecific relationships assist in the reproductive strategies of living organisms?
2	 What are the roles of barriers in living systems?
	
◆Menopause: the 
period in life (typically 
between the ages 
of 45 and 55) when 
menstruation ceases.
	
◆Hormone 
replacement therapy 
(HRT): medication 
containing female 
hormones that is taken 
to replace the oestradiol 
and progesterone that the 
body stops making during 
menopause.
Top tip!
The continuity 
of pregnancy is 
maintained by 
progesterone secretion 
initially from the corpus 
luteum and then 
from the placenta, 
whereas the changes 
during childbirth are 
triggered by a decrease 
in progesterone levels, 
allowing increases in 
oxytocin secretion due 
to positive feedback.
12	Suggest why 
the immediate 
production of 
hCG by the 
embryo while it 
still consists of 
relatively few cells 
is significant in a 
successful outcome 
to gestation. 
13	Distinguish 
between 
negative and 
positive feedback 
processes.
