Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
760
Homeostasis
D3.3
•	 How are constant internal conditions maintained in humans?
•	 What are the benefits to organisms of maintaining constant internal conditions?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D3.3.1 	 Homeostasis as maintenance of the internal environment of an organism
	 D3.3.2 	 Negative feedback loops in homeostasis
	 D3.3.3 	 Regulation of blood glucose as an example of the role of hormones 
in homeostasis
	 D3.3.4 	 Physiological changes that form the basis of type 1 and type 2 diabetes
	 D3.3.5 	 Thermoregulation as an example of negative feedback control
	 D3.3.6 	 Thermoregulation mechanisms in humans
	 D3.3.7 	 Role of the kidney in osmoregulation and excretion (HL only)
	 D3.3.8 	 Role of the glomerulus, Bowman’s capsule and proximal convoluted tubule in 
excretion (HL only)
	 D3.3.9 	 Role of the loop of Henle (HL only)
	 D3.3.10 	Osmoregulation by water reabsorption in the collecting ducts (HL only)
	 D3.3.11 	Changes in blood supply to organs in response to changes in activity (HL only)
Homeostasis 
Living organisms face changing and sometimes hostile environments; some external conditions 
change slowly, others dramatically. For example, temperature changes quickly on land that is 
exposed to direct sunlight, but the temperature of water exposed to sunlight changes very slowly 
(Chapter A1.1, page 9). How do organisms respond to environmental changes?
An animal that can maintain a constant internal environment, enabling it to continue normal 
activities more or less whatever the external conditions, is known as a regulator. For example, 
mammals and birds maintain a high and almost constant body temperature over a very wide range 
of external temperatures. Their bodies are at or about the optimum temperature for most of the 
enzymes that drive their metabolism. Their muscles contract efficiently and the nervous system 
coordinates responses precisely, even when external conditions are unfavourable. Regulators have 
greater freedom in choosing where to live.
Homeostasis is the ability to maintain a constant internal environment. Homeostasis means ‘staying 
the same’. The internal environment consists of the blood circulating in the body and the fluid that 
circulates among cells (tissue fluid that forms from blood plasma), delivering nutrients and removing 
waste products while bathing the cells. Mammals are excellent examples of animals that maintain 
remarkably constant internal conditions. They successfully regulate their body temperature, blood 
pH, blood glucose concentration and blood osmotic concentration at constant levels or within 
narrow limits (Figure D3.3.1). These homeostatic variables are kept within pre-set limits, despite 
fluctuations in the external environment.
Link
Homeostasis is 
defined and covered 
in Chapter A2.2, 
page 73.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.3   Homeostasis
761
Negative feedback loops 
in homeostasis
Negative feedback is the type of control in which conditions are 
brought back to a set value as soon as it is detected that they have 
deviated from it (Figure D3.3.2). Negative feedback loops are used in 
homeostasis, rather than positive feedback loops, because they involve 
a return to the original set point. Positive feedback moves conditions 
further away from equilibrium (the set point) and so would not restore 
the original conditions. Negative feedback returns homeostatic variables 
to the set point from values above and below the set point, for example 
temperature above and below the optimum temperature for the body.
body
temperature
glucose level
of blood
water content
of blood
pressure of
blood in
arteries
concentration of
respiratory gases in
blood (pCO2, pO2)
concentration of
essential ions
heart rate
pH of blood
mammals
examples of
homeostasis
by negative
feedback
 
■Figure D3.3.1 Homeostasis in mammals
Concept: Continuity and change
Organisms experience changes in their internal and external environment that cause 
deviation away from equilibrium. Negative feedback mechanisms return body systems 
to their original set point. Homeostatic mechanisms allow for continuity in body 
systems. For example, control of body temperature allows enzymes to work at their 
optimum, and water balance maintains osmotic concentrations within safe limits.
In mammals, regulation of body temperature, blood sugar level and the amounts of water and ions in 
blood and tissue fluid (osmoregulation) are regulated by negative feedback. The detectors are 
specialized cells in either the brain or other organs, such as the pancreas. The effectors are organs 
such as the skin, liver and kidneys. Information passes between these cells and organs via the nerves 
of the nervous system or via hormones (the endocrine system), or both. The outcome is an incredibly 
precisely regulated internal environment.  
input –
change to
the system
receptor
components of a negative feedback control system
measures level
of the variable
coordinator
level of operation is set here, and
information from receptor received and
compared with set value, and commands
to effector despatched from here
effector
brings about a second
change to system
(in opposite direction
to the input)
output –
condition restored
to set value
feedback loop
establishes the change has been corrected,
and causes the effector to be switched off
 
■Figure D3.3.2 Negative feedback, the mechanism
Regulation of blood glucose as an example 
of the role of hormones in homeostasis
Transport of glucose to all cells is a key function of the blood circulation. In humans, the normal 
level of blood glucose is about 90 mg of glucose in every 100 cm3 of blood, but it can vary. For 
example, during an extended period without food, or after prolonged physical activity, blood glucose 
Common 
mistake
Homeostasis is 
control of the internal 
environment and 
does not involve a 
person controlling their 
external environment. 
Do not confuse 
homeostasis with 
responses to external 
stimuli, such as 
touching a hot object.
Link
Negative feedback is 
defined in Chapter 
C4.1, page 557; for 
HL students it is also 
covered in Chapter 
C2.1, page 465.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
762
may fall to as low as 70 mg. After a meal rich in carbohydrate has been digested, blood glucose may 
rise to 150 mg. 
Respiration is a continuous process in all living cells. To maintain their metabolism, cells need a 
regular supply of glucose, which can be quickly absorbed across the cell membrane. Glucose is the 
main respiratory substrate for many tissues. Most cells (including muscle cells) hold reserves in the 
form of glycogen, which is quickly converted to glucose during prolonged physical activity. However, 
glycogen reserves may be used up quickly. In the brain, glucose is the only substrate the cells can 
use and, here, there is no glycogen store held in reserve.
The maintenance of a constant level of this monosaccharide in the blood plasma is important for 
two reasons: 
l	 If our blood glucose falls below 60 mg per 100 cm3, we have a condition called hypoglycaemia. 
If this is not quickly reversed, we may faint. If the body and brain continue to be deprived of 
adequate glucose levels, convulsions and coma follow. 
l	 An abnormally high concentration of blood glucose, known as hyperglycaemia, is also a 
problem. Since a high concentration of any soluble metabolite lowers the water potential of the 
blood plasma, water is drawn from the cells and tissue fluid by osmosis, back into the blood. 
As the volume of blood increases, water is excreted by the kidney to maintain the correct 
concentration of blood. As a result, the body tends to become dehydrated and the circulatory 
system is deprived of fluid. Ultimately, blood pressure cannot be maintained. 
For these reasons, it is critically important that blood glucose is held within set limits.
 
■Mechanism for regulation of blood glucose
After the digestion of carbohydrates in the gut, glucose is absorbed across the epithelial cells of the 
villi in the small intestine and into the hepatic portal vein. The blood carrying the glucose reaches 
the liver first. If the glucose level is too high, glucose is withdrawn from the blood and stored as 
glycogen. Despite this action, blood circulating in the body immediately after a meal does have a 
raised level of glucose. At the pancreas, the presence of an excess of blood glucose is detected in 
patches of cells known as the islets of Langerhans (Figure D3.3.3). These islets are hormone-
secreting glands (endocrine glands); they have a rich capillary network, but no ducts that would 
carry secretions away. Instead, their hormones are transported all over the body by the blood. 
The islets of Langerhans contain two types of cell: alpha (α) cells and beta (β) cells. 
TS of pancreatic gland showing an islet of Langerhans
duct carries pancreatic
juice to duodenum
cells of pancreatic
gland surrounding islet
of Langerhans secrete
pancreatic juice
islet of
Langerhans
blood capillary
α cells
β cells
drawing of part of pancreatic gland
 
■Figure D3.3.3 Islet of Langerhans in the pancreas
	
◆Hypoglycaemia: 
condition when blood 
sugar levels are too low.
	
◆Hyperglycaemia: 
condition when blood 
sugar levels are too high.
	
◆Islets of 
Langerhans: groups of 
endocrine cells located in 
the pancreas.
	
◆Alpha (α) cell: 
glucagon-secreting cell of 
the islets of Langerhans in 
the pancreas.
	
◆Beta (β) cell: insulin-
secreting cell of the islets 
of Langerhans in the 
pancreas.
Top tip!
In biology, if the prefix 
to a word is ‘hypo‘ 
then some factor is 
too low; if the prefix 
is ‘hyper‘ then it 
means a factor is too 
high. For example, 
‘hypoglycaemia’ means 
that blood sugar 
levels are too low 
and ‘hyperglycaemia’ 
that blood sugar is 
too high.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.3   Homeostasis
763
A raised blood glucose level stimulates the β cells, and they secrete the hormone insulin into the 
capillary network. Insulin causes the uptake of glucose into cells all over the body, but especially by 
the liver and the skeletal muscle fibres. It also increases the rate at which glucose is used in 
respiration, in preference to alternative substrates (such as fat). Another effect of insulin is to trigger 
conversion of glucose to glycogen in cells (glycogenesis), and of glucose to fatty acids and fats, and 
finally the deposition of fat around the body. 
As the blood glucose level reverts to normal, this is detected in the islets of Langerhans, and the 
β cells stop insulin secretion. Meanwhile, the hormone is excreted by the kidney tubules and the 
blood insulin level falls. 
When the blood glucose level falls below normal, the α cells of the pancreas secrete a hormone 
called glucagon. This hormone activates the enzymes in cells that convert glycogen to glucose 
(glycogenolysis) and amino acids to glucose (gluconeogenesis). Glucagon also reduces the rate of 
respiration (Figures D3.3.4). 
As the blood glucose level reverts to normal, glucagon production ceases and this hormone, in turn, 
is removed from the blood in the kidney tubules. 
Common mistake
Do not confuse glucagon with glycogen. Glucagon is a hormone and glycogen a storage product of 
glucose. Make sure these terms are spelt correctly to avoid confusion.
liver:
glucose       glycogen,
cell respiration increased,
glucose       fatty acids + fats
normal glucose level of the
blood (about 90 mg/100 cm3)
glucagon
secreted
by α cells
detected in islets of
Langerhans of pancreas
in liver glycogen and amino acids
are converted into glucose
fall in blood glucose
(starvation, physical activity)
rise in blood glucose
normal blood
glucose level
glucagon secretion
stops (negative
feedback) – glucagon
excreted by the
kidneys
insulin secretion
stops (negative
feedback) – insulin
excreted by the
kidneys
rise in blood glucose
(after meal)
detected in islets of
Langerhans of pancreas
insulin secreted by β cells
fall in blood glucose
muscle:
glucose       glycogen,
cell respiration increased
other tissues:
cell respiration increased
 
■Figure D3.3.4 Glucose regulation by negative feedback
Common mistake
The β cells in the pancreatic islets monitor blood glucose 
concentration directly – the hypothalamus is not involved. 
It is incorrect to state that the hypothalamus monitors blood 
glucose concentration and, when the concentration is high, 
sends messages to the pancreas to stimulate insulin secretion.
Common mistake
Glucagon is a hormone, not an enzyme, so it is incorrect to 
state that glycogen is broken down into glucose by glucagon. 
It is correct to say that glucagon causes cells to breakdown 
glycogen.
1	 Predict what 
type of organelle 
you would 
expect to see 
most frequently 
when a liver 
cell is examined 
by electron 
microscopy. 
	
◆Glucagon: hormone 
made in the pancreas that 
promotes the breakdown 
of glycogen to glucose in 
the liver and muscle cells.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
764
Physiological changes that form the 
basis of type 1 and type 2 diabetes
Diabetes is where the body fails to regulate blood glucose levels correctly. There are two types: 
type 1 diabetes is the result of a failure of insulin production by the β cells and type 2 diabetes 
(diabetes mellitus) is a failure of the insulin receptor proteins on the cell membranes of target cells 
(Table D3.3.1). As a result, blood glucose level is more erratic and, generally, permanently raised. 
Glucose is also regularly excreted in the urine. If this condition is not diagnosed and treated, it 
carries an increased risk of circulatory disorders, renal failure, blindness, strokes or heart attacks.
 
■Table D3.3.1 Diabetes, causes and treatment
Type 1 diabetes ‘early onset diabetes’
Type 2 diabetes ‘late onset diabetes’
relatively rare
the common form (90% of all cases of diabetes are 
of this type)
this form of diabetes is having an increasing effect on 
human societies around the world, including young 
people and even children in economically developed 
countries, seemingly because of poor diet
affects young people below the age of 20 years
common in people over 40 years, especially if 
overweight
due to the destruction of the β cells of the islets of 
Langerhans by the body’s own immune system
β cells continue functioning but body stops 
responding to insulin
symptoms:
•	
constant thirst
•	
undiminished hunger
•	
excessive urination
symptoms:
•	
mild – people with type 2 diabetes usually have 
sufficient blood insulin, but insulin receptors on 
cells have become defective
treatment:
•	
injection of insulin into the bloodstream daily
•	
regular measurement of blood glucose level
treatment: 
•	
largely by diet alone
Risk factors for type 2 diabetes include: being overweight or obese, age 40 or older, having a family 
history of diabetes, having high blood pressure, having a low level of HDL (‘good’ cholesterol) or a 
high level of triglycerides, or being inactive. Scientists think type I diabetes is caused by genes and 
environmental factors, such as viruses, that might trigger the disease (that is, cause an autoimmune 
response where the immune system attacks and destroys the insulin-producing b cells of the 
pancreas). Having a parent or sibling with the disease may increase the chance of developing type 1 
diabetes, as may exposure to specific viruses. 
Type 2 diabetes can be controlled by diet, to reduce weight. Type 1 diabetes is controlled by insulin 
injections and insulin pumps: blood sugar levels are monitored throughout the day and insulin 
administered when there is a danger of blood sugar becoming too high.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Interpreting results
The glucose tolerance test involves giving sugar to individuals and then sampling blood 
to determine how quickly glucose is cleared from their blood. Typically, a standard dose 
of glucose (75 g for adults) is given orally – all to be consumed within 5 minutes. Blood 
glucose levels are monitored subsequently.
	
◆Diabetes: failure to 
regulate blood glucose 
levels.
	
◆Type 1 diabetes: the 
result of a failure of insulin 
production by the β cells.
	
◆Type 2 diabetes: 
failure of the insulin 
receptor proteins on 
the cell membranes of 
target cells.
Top tip!
Rather than stating 
that type 2 diabetes 
is caused by having a 
high-sugar diet, it is 
more correct to state 
that there is a link and 
that such diets are 
one of a number of 
risk factors.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.3   Homeostasis
765
In an investigation to find out how quickly glucose was removed from the blood, two 
subjects were treated in this way, and their blood glucose was measured at intervals of 
30 minutes for a period of 5 hours. One subject had normal glucose metabolism and 
one subject had diabetes. The results are given in Table D3.3.2.
 
■Table D3.3.2 Measuring blood glucose concentrations in unaffected and diabetic individuals
Time after glucose ingestion 
(hours)
Unaffected individual blood 
glucose (mg/100cm3)
Diabetic blood glucose 
(mg/100cm3)
0.0
75
150
0.5
150
250
1.0
160
300
1.5
140
325
2.0
110
375
2.5
100
325
3.0
90
300
3.5
85
275
4.0
80
250
4.5
75
225
5.0
75
200
Using the data in Table D3.3.2, answer the following questions:
1	 For normal diabetes screening in many countries, a sample of blood is taken 
for analysis at time 0 and again at 2 hours after the glucose was ingested, only. 
Comment on why these times may have been selected.
2	 Describe where the excess glucose in blood plasma is detected in the body, in a way 
that leads to activation of the glucose level adjustment mechanism.
3	 Explain how and where in the body the excess glucose is metabolized.
4	 Outline, using a table, the ways in which an excess of blood glucose is harmful to 
body organs and tissues.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Constructing graphs for raw and processed data
Draw a line graph of the results shown in the Inquiry box above. Annotate the line 
graph to identify the maximum glucose levels and the lengths of time taken for the 
levels to return to those at the start.
Nature of science: Theories
Scientists have developed general explanations (i.e. theories) to explain the occurrence of diseases 
such as type 1 diabetes, based on observed patterns or tested hypotheses. Type 1 diabetes is 
considered to be an autoimmune disease. Autoimmune diseases are not always well understood 
in the medical community. Doctors know that autoimmune diseases are caused when our own 
immune system (hence ‘auto’-immune) recognizes our own body cells as foreign cells or pathogens 
and begins to damage and destroy them, just as the immune system normally does to actual 
pathogenic cells. However, the reason why an individual’s immune system starts fighting against 
their body cells is not completely understood. For that reason, it is often difficult to predict who will 
develop an autoimmune disease and how to manage it. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
766
Thermoregulation as an example 
of negative feedback control
Negative feedback is when changes away from a set-point in the body are corrected and conditions 
returned to equilibrium. Regulation of our body temperature, known as thermoregulation, involves 
controlling both heat loss across the surface of the body and heat production within the body. It is 
an example of a negative feedback control.
Significant changes in temperature derive from the environment. The body needs various 
mechanisms to respond to these changes. White adipose tissue forms an insulating barrier around 
the outside of the body and is therefore an important means of regulating heat loss. There is also 
another form of adipose tissue – brown adipose tissue – that can be used to release heat when there 
is a decrease in temperature. 
Thyroxin, an iodine-containing hormone produced in the thyroid gland, also plays a part in the 
control of temperature regulation. The hypothalamus secretes thyrotropin-releasing hormone which, 
in turn, stimulates the pituitary gland to produce thyroid-stimulating hormone. This hormone 
stimulates the production of thyroxin. The presence of thyroxin in the blood circulation stimulates 
oxygen consumption and increases the basal metabolic rate of the body organs. Variations in 
secretion of thyroxin help the control of body temperature.
Temperature changes are detected by peripheral thermoreceptors in the skin and hypothalamus. 
These pass on messages to the effectors, as we explore below.
Thermoregulation by physiological 
and behavioural means 
Mammals and birds maintain a high and relatively constant body temperature by generating heat 
within the body from the reactions of metabolism and by being able to regulate this heat production. 
These are called physiological controls. Mammals also control the loss of heat through the skin (see 
below). An animal with this form of thermoregulation is called an endotherm, meaning ‘inside heat’. 
Mammals and birds also regulate their body temperature by modifying their behaviour: birds open 
up their wings and spread their feathers to allow circulating air to reach their skin and lower their 
body temperature. Mammals can seek cooler areas of their habitat if they begin to overheat. 
 
■Thermoregulation mechanisms in humans
Humans hold their inner body temperature (core temperature) just below 37 ºC. In fact, human core 
temperature only varies between about 35.5 and 37.0 ºC within a 24-hour period, when we are in 
good health. Heat is lost to the environment by convection, radiation and conduction. The body also 
loses heat by evaporation.  
Maintaining homeostasis through negative feedback requires a stimulus, receptor, control centre 
and effector.
The human body’s temperature regulatory control centre is in the hypothalamus of the brain. 
The hypothalamus receives electrical impulses from temperature receptors in the skin and brain that 
the body temperature is either higher or lower than the set point, and sends signals to effectors to 
respond to the change in temperature. Effectors include the skin, liver and muscles. They regulate 
blood flow from the arteries into the capillaries through vasoconstriction (when the arterioles 
contract and narrow to reduce blood flow) and vasodilation (when the arterioles relax and widen to 
allow greater blood flow).
	
◆Thermoregulation: 
regulation of body 
temperature.
	
◆Thyroid gland: an 
endocrine gland found in 
the neck of vertebrates, 
site of production of 
thyroxin and other 
hormones influencing the 
rate of metabolism.
	
◆Vasoconstriction: 
the narrowing 
(constriction) of blood 
vessels by small muscles 
in their walls, restricting 
blood flow.
	
◆Vasodilation: the 
widening (dilation) of 
blood vessels by small 
muscles in their walls, 
increasing blood flow.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D3.3   Homeostasis
767
Increase in temperature
Physiological changes if there is an increase in temperature include:
l	 Vasodilation: arterioles supplying blood to the skin dilate, allowing increased blood flow to the 
capillaries in the skin. This leads to increased radiation of heat away from the body.
l	 Muscles attached to hairs in the skin relax, so hairs lie flat on the surface of the skin, allowing 
radiation of heat from the body.
l	 Sweat glands are activated to produce increased sweat, which evaporates from the skin and 
cools the body.
Decrease in temperature
Physiological changes if there is a decrease in temperature include:
l	 Vasoconstriction: arterioles supplying blood to the skin constrict, causing decreased blood flow 
to the capillaries in the skin. This leads to decreased radiation of heat away from the body.
l	 Muscles attached to hairs in the skin contract, causing hairs to be erect on the surface of the 
skin, trapping heat.
l	 Sweat glands decrease sweat production.
l	 Skeletal muscles contract and relax rapidly causing shivering, which generates heat.
l	 Metabolic activity in the liver increases, heating the body.
In mammals, brown adipose tissue is used to maintain the body temperature of newly born 
offspring. Brown adipose tissue metabolizes triglycerides in mitochondria to emit heat. Usually, 
mitochondria generate ATP (they are said to be ‘coupled’ to ATP production), which is then used to 
support life processes such as movement. The function of the mitochondria can be ‘uncoupled’ (i.e. 
separated from their usual function), however, and the energy that would have been stored in ATP 
is used to release heat instead. This is known as uncoupled respiration. Newborns have a large 
surface area compared to their size, and so lose heat rapidly. Uncoupled respiration in brown adipose 
tissue enables them to generate sufficient heat to maintain body temperature.
Hot
sweat glands
become active
heat loss by
evaporation
sweating
is reduced
hair shaft
muscles
cause hairs
to stand up
blood vessel
constricting
thickening fat layer is a long-term
response to the cold environment
muscle
is relaxed,
hairs lie on
the surface
blood
vessel dilating
sweat reaches the skin and is converted
from a liquid to a vapour
Cold
 
■Figure D3.3.5 Thermoregulation in humans


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
768
The negative feedback mechanisms involved in thermoregulation are shown in Figure D3.3.6.
vasodilation
warming
vasoconstriction
hypothalamus
hypothalamus
shivering
cooling
sweating
negative
 feedback
external factors
external factors
 
■Figure D3.3.6 Negative feedback mechanisms in thermoregulation
Role of the kidney in osmoregulation 
and excretion
The chemical reactions of metabolism give by-products. Some of these would be toxic if they were 
allowed to accumulate in the organism. Excretion is the removal from the body of the waste 
products of metabolism. It is a characteristic activity of all living things. Metabolites that are present 
in excessive concentrations are also excreted. 
In mammals, excretion plays an important part in the process by which the internal environment is 
regulated to maintain more or less constant conditions (homeostasis). 
Associated with excretion, and very much part of homeostasis, is the process of osmoregulation. 
Osmoregulation is the maintenance of a proper balance of water and dissolved substances in the 
organism. The kidney maintains the osmotic concentration of tissue fluid and blood plasma. 
	
◆Excretion: the 
removal from the body of 
the waste products of cell 
metabolism.
	
◆Osmoregulation: the 
maintenance of a proper 
balance of water and 
dissolved substances in 
the organism; regulation 
of osmotic concentration.
	
◆Osmotic 
concentration: the 
measure of solute 
concentration, defined as 
the number of osmoles 
(osmol) of solute per litre (L).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.3   Homeostasis
769
All animals need to balance water uptake and loss from the body. We know that water enters and 
exits cells by osmosis (page 682). If water uptake into animal cells is excessive, the hydrostatic 
pressure that quickly develops stretches the plasma membrane to the point of bursting. Alternatively, 
if water loss is excessive, a cell will shrink and die, because water is an essential and major 
component of the cytoplasm of all living organisms – it makes up about 90% of cell volume.
Top tip!
Osmotic concentration is measured in osmoles per litre (osmol L−1). It used to be known as 
osmolarity – older websites and books may still use this term.
 
■The human kidney – an organ of excretion and osmoregulation
The role of our kidneys is to regulate the body’s internal environment by constantly adjusting the 
composition of the blood. Waste products of metabolism are transported from the metabolizing cells 
by the blood circulation, removed from the blood in the kidneys and excreted in a solution called 
urine. At the same time, the concentrations of inorganic ions, such as Na+ and Cl−, and of water 
in the body are also regulated in the kidneys. The functioning of the kidney is another example of 
homeostasis by negative feedback.
The position of the kidneys in humans is shown in Figure D3.3.7. Each kidney is served by a renal 
artery and drained by a renal vein. Urine from the kidney is carried to the bladder by the ureter, 
and from the bladder to the exterior by the urethra, when the bladder sphincter muscle is relaxed. 
Together these structures are known as the urinary system.
thorax
diaphragm
kidney
(attached to
dorsal wall)
ureter
bladder
urethra
dorsal aorta
vena cava
renal artery
renal vein
sphincter
muscle
– under
voluntary
control
 
■Figure D3.3.7 The human urinary system
In section, a kidney can be seen to consist of an outer cortex and inner medulla, and these are made 
up of a million or more tiny tubules called nephrons. The shape of a nephron and its arrangement in 
the kidney are shown in Figure D3.3.8.
Blood vessels are closely associated with each of the distinctly shaped regions of the nephrons. For 
example, the first part of the nephron is formed into the cup-shaped Bowman’s capsule, and the 
capillary network here is known as the glomerulus. These occur in the cortex. The convoluted 
tubules occur partly in the cortex and partly in the medulla, but notice that the extended loops of 
Henle and collecting ducts occur largely in the medulla.
Each region of the nephron has a specific role to play in the work of the kidney, and the capillary 
network serving the nephron plays a key part, too, as we shall now see.
2	 Distinguish 
between excretion 
and osmoregulation 
by means of both 
definitions and 
examples.
Link
Osmosis is covered 
in detail in Chapter 
D2.3, page 682.
	
◆Bowman’s (renal) 
capsule: the cup-shaped 
closed end of a nephron 
which contains the 
glomerulus.
	
◆Glomerulus: network 
of capillaries which 
are surrounded by the 
Bowman’s capsule.
	
◆Loop of Henle: loop 
of mammalian kidney 
tubule, passing from 
cortex to medulla and 
back, important in the 
process of concentration 
of urine.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
770
LS through kidney showing positions of nephrons in cortex
and medulla
nephron with blood capillaries
1 Bowman’s capsule
2 proximal convoluted
   tubule
4 distal convoluted
   tubule
3 loop of Henle
   descending limb
   ascending limb
5 collecting duct
glomerulus
branch of
renal artery
branch of
renal vein
capillary
network to
convoluted
tubules
cortex
medulla
vasa recta
(capillary to
loop of Henle)
collecting duct
renal artery
pelvis –
expanded
origin of
ureter
Roles of the parts of the nephron:
1 Bowman’s capsule + glomerulus = ultrafiltration
2 proximal convoluted tubule = selective
   reabsorption from filtrate
3 loop of Henle = water conservation
4 distal convoluted tubule = pH adjustment
   and ion reabsorption
5 collecting duct = water reabsorption
photomicrograph of the cortex of the kidney in section, showing the tubules, renal capsules and capillary networks
ureter
medulla
cortex
nephrons
fibrous capsule
Bowman’s
capsule
glomerulus
capillaries
containing
red blood cells
distal
and
proximal
convoluted
tubules
in section
 
■Figure D3.3.8 The kidney and its nephrons – structure and roles


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.3   Homeostasis
771
Role of the glomerulus, Bowman’s capsule 
and proximal convoluted tubule in excretion
 
■The formation of urine
In humans, about 1.0–1.5 L of urine is formed each day, typically containing about 40–50 g of 
solutes, of which urea (about 30 g) and sodium chloride (up to 15 g) make up the bulk. The nephron 
produces urine in a continuous process, which we can conveniently divide into several steps to show 
how the blood composition is so precisely regulated. 
Step 1: Ultrafiltration in the renal capsule
In the glomerulus, much of the water and many relatively small molecules present in the blood 
plasma, including useful ions, glucose and amino acids, are forced out of the capillaries, along with 
urea, into the lumen of the capsule (Figure D3.3.9). This fluid is called the glomerular filtrate and 
the process is described as ultrafiltration, because it is powered by the pressure of the blood 
(hydrostatic pressure). The blood pressure here is high enough for ultrafiltration because the input 
capillary (afferent arteriole) is significantly wider than the output capillary (efferent arteriole). 
path of filtrate from capillary to
lumen of the renal capsule between
(not through) the podocytes
blood under
pressure (cells
and plasma
proteins
retained here)
pores in
capillary
wall
nucleus of
podocyte
cell
foot-like extensions of podocytes
wrap around capillary
water and
other small
molecules
pass out
basement
membrane
(the final
filter)
efferent arteriole
(narrow)
capillary wall
with pores
wall of
Bowman’s
capsule
(squamous
epithelium)
basement
membrane
afferent arteriole
(wide)
cells of proximal
false-colour scanning electron micrograph of podocytes (pale purple) with
their extensions wrapped around the blood capillaries (pink/red) (×3500)
convoluted tubule
podocytes
capillaries of
the glomerulus
(high blood
pressure here)
path of filtrate into
lumen of nephron
podocytes
with their
extensions
wrapped around
blood capillaries
 
■Figure D3.3.9 The site of ultrafiltration
	
◆Ultrafiltration: 
occurs through the tiny 
pores in the capillaries 
of the glomerulus, under 
pressure from the blood.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
772
The barrier between the blood plasma and the lumen of the Bowman’s capsule functions as a filter 
or ‘sieve’ through which ultrafiltration occurs. This sieve is made of two layers of cells (the 
endothelium of the capillaries of the glomerulus and the epithelium of the capsule wall), between 
which is a basement membrane. 
You can see this arrangement in Figure D3.3.9.
The cells of the inner wall of the capsule are called podocytes because they have feet-like extensions. 
These wrap around the capillaries of the glomerulus, leaving a network of slits between the extensions. 
Similarly, the endothelium of the capillaries has pores. These are large enough for fluid to pass 
through, but not large enough for the passage of blood cells. This detail has only become known 
because of studies using the electron microscope; these filtration gaps are very small indeed.
Finally, there is the basement membrane. This is a layer that surrounds and supports the capillary 
walls. This structure consists of a mesh-work of glycoproteins that allows the filtrate to pass, but 
which retains almost all of the plasma proteins. 
The fluid that has filtered through into the renal capsule is very similar to blood plasma, but it has a 
significant difference (Table D3.3.3). Not only are blood cells retained in the plasma, but the majority 
of blood proteins and polypeptides also remain there.
 
■Table D3.3.3 A comparison of chief components of the blood plasma 
and the glomerular filtrate (units: *mol dm−3/**mg dm−3)
Blood plasma
Filtrate
urea*
5
5
glucose*
5
5
sodium ions*
150
145
chloride ion*
110
115
proteins**
740
3–4
Step 2: Selective reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule
The proximal convoluted tubule is the longest section of the nephron and it is here that that a large 
part of the filtrate is reabsorbed into the capillary network. The walls of the tubule are one cell thick 
and their cells are packed with mitochondria; we expect this if active transport is a key part of the 
mechanism for reabsorption. The cell membranes of the cells of the tubule wall (in contact with the 
filtrate) all have a ‘brush border’ of microvilli. These increase the surface area where reabsorption 
occurs enormously (see Chapter B2.3, page 266, Figure B2.3.10). The individual mechanisms of 
transport are given in Table D3.3.4.
 
■Table D3.3.4 Mechanisms of selective reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule
Component of filtrate
Mechanism of reabsorption
glucose
potassium pumps maintain a gradient of sodium between the lumen of 
the proximal convoluted tubule and the inside of the epithelial cells lining the 
tubule, and sodium-dependent glucose cotransporters are used to transport 
glucose into the cell along with sodium ions; glucose is absorbed by facilitated 
diffusion at the bottom of the epithelial cells, into blood capillaries
amino acids and other 
essential metabolites
by active transport into the epithelial cells, and by facilitated diffusion at the 
bottom of the epithelial cells, into blood capillaries
ions (Na+, Cl− and others)
by a combination of active transport, facilitated diffusion and some exchange 
of ions
urea
diffusion
proteins
pinocytosis
water
osmosis
3	 State the source 
of energy for 
ultrafiltration in the 
glomerulus.
Link
The adaptations 
of the proximal 
convoluted tubule 
in the nephron are 
covered in Chapter 
B2.3, page 265.
4	 The cells of the 
walls of the 
proximal 
convoluted tubule 
have a brush 
border. Describe 
what this means 
and explain how 
it helps in tubule 
function.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.3   Homeostasis
773
nucleus
microvilli forming
a brush border
mitochondrion
lateral
infolding
apical side
amino acids
glucose
Na+
urea
H2O
ions (e.g. Ca2+, Cl–)
active
passive
invagination of
plasma membrane
on basolateral
 surface of cell
sodium−potassium
pump
K+
K+
capillary
 
■Figure D3.3.10 Reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule
The basolateral area of the cell contains many mitochondria, which provide energy for sodium–
potassium pumps (see page 241) located in the plasma membrane. The ion gradient created by these 
pumps in turn supports ion and water reabsorption on the apical side of the cell. By pumping three 
sodium ions out of the cell for reabsorption into the bloodstream and pumping two potassium ions 
back into the cell, a gradient is set up so that sodium ions can move by facilitated diffusion into the 
cell at the apical surface (Figure D3.3.10). Sodium enters the cell down its electrochemical gradient 
into tubule epithelial cells. At the same time, glucose is carried into the cell by sodium-dependent 
glucose cotransporters (for further information about these membrane proteins, see page 242).
Ions, such as sodium, and molecules (glucose and amino acids) are absorbed by facilitated diffusion 
at the basolateral side of the cell, into blood capillaries. The invaginations increase the surface area 
for absorption and for the activity of the sodium–potassium pumps.
Role of the loop of Henle
The function of the loop of Henle is to enable the kidneys to conserve water. Since urea is expelled 
from the body in solution, some water loss in excretion is inevitable. There is a potential problem here. 
Water is a major component of the body and it can be a scarce resource for terrestrial organisms. 
The structure of the loop of Henle with its descending and ascending limbs, together with a parallel 
blood supply, the vasa recta, is shown in Figure D3.3.11. The vasa recta is part of the same capillary 
network that surrounds a nephron. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
774
The gradient across the medulla is from a less concentrated salt solution near the cortex to the most 
concentrated salt solution at the tips of the pyramid of the medulla (Figure D3.3.8). The pyramid 
region of the medulla consists mostly of the collecting ducts. Thus, the loop of Henle maintains 
hypertonic conditions around the collecting ducts. The osmotic gradient allows water to be 
withdrawn from the collecting ducts if circumstances require it. 
vasa recta
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
Cl–
Cl–
Na+
Na+
here the walls are
permeable to ions
(Na+, Cl–), but
impermeable to water
Na+, Cl– are actively
transported out
Na+, Cl– diffuse out from
this concentrated solution
water loss causes the
solution of ions to
become concentrated
here
A high concentration of salts is formed in the medulla,
which allows water to be absorbed from the nearby
collecting ducts.
there is a gradient in
concentration of ions
across the medulla
tissue of medulla
walls of the
descending limb are
permeable to water
the rising concentration
of ions outside causes
loss of water by osmosis
the vasa recta
delivers oxygen
to the cells of
the tubule walls
descending limb
ascending limb
loop of 
Henle
 
■Figure D3.3.11 The functioning loop of Henle
Look first at the second half of the loop, the ascending limb. In the upper (thick-walled) part of the 
ascending limb, sodium and chloride ions are pumped out of the filtrate into the fluid between the 
cells of the medulla, called the interstitial fluid. The energy to pump these ions is transferred from 
ATP. In the lower (thin-walled) part of the ascending limb, sodium and chloride ions diffuse out into 
the interstitial fluid. This movement of sodium chloride out of the tubule helps maintain the osmotic 
concentration of the interstitial fluid in the medulla. All along the ascending limbs, the walls are 
unusual in being impermeable to water. So, water in the ascending limb is retained in the filtrate as 
salt is pumped out.
Opposite is the first half of the loop, the descending limb. This limb is fully permeable to water, but 
is of very low permeability to solutes generally. Here, water passes out into the interstitial fluid by 
osmosis, due to the salt concentration in the medulla. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.3   Homeostasis
775
At each level in the loop, the salt concentration in the descending limb is slightly higher than the 
salt concentration in the adjacent ascending limb. As the filtrate flows, the concentrating effect is 
multiplied and so the fluid in and around the hairpin bend of the loops of Henle is saltiest. 
The function of the vasa recta is to deliver oxygen to and remove carbon dioxide from the 
metabolically active cells of the loop of Henle. The vasa recta also absorbs water that has passed into 
the medulla at the collecting ducts. 
Osmoregulation by water reabsorption 
in the collecting ducts
Osmoregulation, the control of the water content of the blood (and therefore of the whole body), is a 
part of homeostasis – another example of regulation by negative feedback. The composition of the 
blood is continuously monitored here by osmoreceptors, as it circulates through the capillary 
networks of the hypothalamus, and from sensory receptors located in certain organs in the body.  
All these inputs enable the hypothalamus to control accurately the activity of the pituitary gland. 
The pituitary gland is situated below the hypothalamus, but is connected to it (Figure C3.1.13, 
page 505). In the process of osmoregulation, it is the posterior part of the pituitary that stores and 
releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH), among other hormones. 
When nerve impulses from the hypothalamus trigger release of ADH into the capillary networks in 
the posterior pituitary, ADH circulates in the bloodstream. However, the targets of this hormone are 
the walls of the collecting ducts of the kidney tubules.
When the water content of the blood is low, ADH is secreted from the posterior pituitary gland. 
When the water content of the blood is high, little or no ADH is secreted.
 
■How does ADH change the permeability of the walls of the 
collecting ducts?
The cell plasma membranes of the cells that form the walls of the collecting ducts contain a high 
proportion of channel proteins (aquaporins). Aquaporins are stored in the membrane of vesicles 
within the cells, and move from these intracellular vesicles to the cell membranes of the collecting 
ducts when ADH levels increase. 
When there is an excess of ADH in the blood circulating past the kidney tubules, this hormone 
binds to receptor molecules in the collecting-duct membrane, causing the protein channels in the 
membranes to open. As a result, much water diffuses out into the medulla and very little diffuses 
from the medulla into the collecting ducts (Figure D3.3.12). 
The water entering the medulla is taken up and redistributed in the body by the blood circulation. 
Only a small amount of very concentrated urine is formed. Meanwhile, the action of the liver 
continually removes and inactivates ADH. This means that the presence of freshly released ADH has 
a regulatory effect.
When ADH is absent from the blood circulating past the kidney tubules, the protein channels in the 
collecting-duct plasma membranes are closed. The amount of water that is retained by the medulla 
tissue is now minimal. The urine becomes copious and dilute.
Top tip!
When the intake of 
water exceeds the 
body’s normal needs, 
the urine produced 
is copious and dilute. 
We notice this after 
drinking a lot of water. 
On the other hand, if 
we have taken in very 
little water, have been 
sweating heavily (part 
of our temperature 
regulation mechanism) 
or if we have eaten 
very salty food, 
perhaps, then a small 
volume of concentrated 
urine is formed.
Link
The structure of 
a fluid mosaic 
membrane and its 
channel proteins are 
discussed in Chapter 
B2.1, page 234.
5	 Explain why 
small quantities 
of concentrated 
urine are produced 
when you are 
dehydrated.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
776
cortex
a lot of dilute
urine formed
water stays in
the collecting
duct
When we have:
• drunk a lot of water
the hypothalamus detects this and stops the
posterior pituitary gland secreting ADH.
When we have:
• taken in little water
• sweated excessively
• eaten salty food
the hypothalamus detects this and directs the
posterior pituitary gland to secrete ADH.
ADH present
collecting duct walls permeable
water diffuses
into medulla
high concentration
of solutes in medulla
small quantity
of concentrated
urine formed
ADH absent
collecting duct walls less permeable
medulla
high concentration
of solutes in medulla
 
■Figure D3.3.12 Water reabsorption in the collecting ducts
A summary of osmoregulation by the kidneys is shown in Figure D3.3.13.
blood plasma at
normal concentration –
(osmotic concentration
normal)
blood plasma at
normal concentration –
(osmotic concentration
normal)
ADH present in plasma
is excreted in kidneys
feeling of thirst,
water likely to
be drunk
pituitary
secretes more ADH
too much water
(or too little salt)
osmoreceptors of
hypothalamus
not stimulated
+
thirst receptors
not stimulated
pituitary
secretes
less ADH
no feeling of thirst,
little water drunk
collecting duct walls
less permeable, so
medulla absorbs less
water from the
collecting ducts
too little water
(or too much salt),
raised
thirst receptors
stimulated
+
osmoreceptors of
hypothalamus
stimulated
large volume
of dilute
urine formed
small volume
Osmoregulation by negative feedback
of concentrated
urine formed
collecting duct
walls more
permeable, so
medulla absorbs more
water from the
collecting ducts
i.e. osmotic potential
lowered
i.e. osmotic potential
 
■Figure D3.3.13 Homeostasis by osmoregulation in the kidneys – a summary


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D3.3   Homeostasis
777
 ATL D3.3A 
Construct a diagram of an individual nephron, extending from the Bowman’s capsule to the 
collecting duct, with its associated blood supply.
Use the knowledge you have gained to annotate the following regions and structures, 
highlighting the features of each and recording its function in the production of urine: Bowman’s 
capsule, proximal convoluted tubule, loop of Henle, collecting duct.
Also include the blood vessels: afferent arteriole, glomerulus, efferent arteriole, capillary bed 
surrounding the convoluted tubules, vasa recta, venules.
 
■Differences in composition of blood plasma, glomerular filtrate 
and urine
The composition of urine that is excreted from the body is variable – depending on diet (including 
salt intake and amount of protein consumed), water intake, degree of physical activity, environmental 
conditions, water loss by other routes (particularly in sweat) and on our state of health. 
On the other hand, the composition of the blood is held more or less constant. This is due to 
the efficiency of the homeostatic mechanisms of the body, particular those operating at the 
kidney tubules.
Similarly, the composition of the filtrate passing into the renal capsule is remarkably constant.  
This is the result of ultrafiltration in the glomerulus, the pressure of the blood, and the sizes of the 
blood proteins and polypeptides dissolved in the plasma – they are mostly too large to be filtered.
In Table D3.3.5, we have evidence of the power of the ultrafiltration mechanism and the scale of 
selective reabsorption. We see the largest divergence in concentration when the composition of the 
filtrate is compared with the composition of urine formed in one day.
 
■Table D3.3.5 Composition of blood, glomerular filtrate and urine
Substance
Total amount 
in the plasma
Filtered 
(per day)
Reabsorbed 
(per day)
Urine (excreted 
per day)
water
3 litres
180 litres
178–179 litres
1–2 litres
glucose
2.7 g
162.0 g 
162.0 g
0.0 g
urea
0.9 g
54.0 g
27.0 g
27.0 g*
proteins and polypeptides
200.0 g
2.0 g
1.9 g
0.1 g
Na+ ions
9.7 g
579.0 g
575.0 g
4.0 g
Cl− ions 
10.7 g
640.0 g
633.7 g
6.3 g
*some is also secreted by the cells of the tubule into the urine
Changes in blood supply to organs in 
response to changes in activity
The blood supplies nutrients and oxygen to body tissue and removes waste products. Metabolically 
active tissues, such as muscles during exercise, require an increased supply of blood to support 
increased rates of respiration. Depending on the levels of activity, blood flow changes around the 
body. Vasoconstriction and vasodilation of arterioles controls the rate of blood flow to tissues.
During sleep, although there is little overall change in total brain blood flow, regional differences 
within the brain may occur. For example, during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, blood flow 
to the hypothalamus and brainstem may be significantly higher than during wakefulness.  
6	 The composition 
of the blood in 
the renal veins 
leaving the kidneys 
differs significantly 
from that in the 
renal arteries. 
Identify and list 
the differences you 
would anticipate.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Organisms
778
On the other hand, blood flow to most skeletal muscle groups, and particularly to the diaphragm, is 
lower during sleep than during wakefulness.
During vigorous exercise, blood is redirected away from organs, such as the gut, not directly involved 
in the activity, and towards skeletal muscles. Redistribution of blood also occurs during a fight or flight 
response, when epinephrine is released from the adrenal gland. This causes blood flow to be increased 
to skeletal muscle and away from organs not required by the response, such as the gut. Epinephrine 
achieves this by causing constriction in many networks of arterioles but dilation of blood vessels to 
the skeletal muscles. During wakeful rest, less blood will be needed in the muscles. If a meal has been 
eaten recently, blood flow to the gut will be increased to help in the digestion and absorption of food. 
The blood flow to the kidneys (renal blood flow) is greater when a person is lying down than when 
standing, and reduced by prolonged vigorous exercise that constricts arterioles leading to the kidney 
and diverts blood to other organs. Overall, blood flow to the kidneys must remain fairly constant to 
maintain osmoregulation and the excretion of waste.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 For what reasons do organisms need to distribute materials and energy?
2	 What biological systems are sensitive to temperature changes? 
