D4.1   Natural selection
779
D4.1
Natural selection
•	 What processes can cause changes in allele frequencies within a population?
•	 What is the role of reproduction in the process of natural selection?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D4.1.1 	 Natural selection as the mechanism driving evolutionary change 
	 D4.1.2 	 Roles of mutation and sexual reproduction in generating the variation on which 
natural selection acts
	 D4.1.3 	 Overproduction of offspring and competition for resources as factors that 
promote natural selection
	 D4.1.4 	 Abiotic factors as selection pressures
	 D4.1.5 	 Differences between individuals in adaptation, survival and reproduction as the 
basis for natural selection
	 D4.1.6 	 Requirement that traits are heritable for evolutionary change to occur
	 D4.1.7 	 Sexual selection as a selection pressure in animal species
	 D4.1.8 	 Modelling of sexual and natural selection based on experimental control of 
selection pressures
	 D4.1.9 	 Concept of the gene pool (HL only)
	 D4.1.10 	Allele frequencies of geographically isolated populations (HL only)
	 D4.1.11 	Changes in allele frequency in the gene pool as a consequence of natural 
selection between individuals according to differences in their heritable traits 
(HL only)
	 D4.1.12 	Differences between directional, disruptive and stabilizing selection (HL only)
	 D4.1.13 	Hardy–Weinberg equation and calculations of allele or genotype frequencies 
(HL only)
	 D4.1.14 	Hardy–Weinberg conditions that must be maintained for a population to be in 
genetic equilibrium (HL only)
	 D4.1.15 	Artificial selection by deliberate choice of traits (HL only)
Natural selection as the mechanism 
driving evolutionary change
Evolution is the development of life from its earliest beginnings to the diversity of organisms we 
know about today, both living and extinct. Evidence for evolution can be found from a variety of 
sources, including fossils (Chapter A2.1, page 47), base sequences in DNA or RNA and amino acid 
sequences in proteins, homologous structures, and from the selective breeding of domesticated 
animals and crop plants (Chapter A4.1, page 141). 
Natural selection is the mechanism that explains how evolution occurs. Natural selection 
operates continuously and over billions of years, resulting in the biodiversity of life on Earth. It can 
also happen over much more rapid timescales, for example in such cases as the evolution of 
viruses and antibiotic-resistant bacteria (Chapter A2.3, page 98, and Chapter C3.2, page 534).  
Link
Evolution is also 
covered in detail 
in Chapter A4.1, 
page 141.
	
◆Natural selection: 
process where organisms 
better adapted to their 
environment survive and 
produce more offspring 
than competitors; the 
mechanism through 
which evolution occurs.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
780
The theory of evolution by natural selection was developed by Charles Darwin. Darwin (1809–82) 
was a careful observer and naturalist who made many discoveries in biology (Figure D4.1.1). 
After attempting to become a doctor at Edinburgh University and then a clergyman at Cambridge 
University, he became the unpaid naturalist on an Admiralty-commissioned expedition to the 
southern hemisphere, on a ship called the HMS Beagle (Chapter A3.1, page 102). During Darwin’s 
lifetime, the age of the Earth was increasingly recognized as being millions of years old, rather than 
thousands. His observations of living and fossilized species made during the voyage made him 
question the Genesis creation myth and the immutability of species.
On this five-year expedition around the world, and in his later investigations and reading, Darwin 
developed the idea of organic evolution by natural selection. Figure D4.1.2 shows a page from one 
of Darwin’s notebooks, where he first developed his ideas for evolution.
Concept: Change
Natural selection is the process that drives evolutionary change.
 ATL D4.1A 
Look at the sketch in Charles Darwin’s ‘B’ notebook (Figure D4.1.2), one of his notebooks used 
to record his thoughts and ideas (a reflection diary). The diagram shows a tree-like structure. 
What do you think Darwin was trying to represent here? Why is this sketch significant?
Darwin always remained very anxious about how the idea of evolution might be received, and he 
made no moves to publish it until the same idea was presented to him in a letter by another biologist 
and traveller, Alfred Russel Wallace. Only then (1859) was On the Origin of Species by Natural 
Selection completed and published. The arguments and ideas in the Origin of Species are summarized 
in Table D4.1.1.
 
■Table D4.1.1 Charles Darwin’s ideas about the origin of species, summarized 
in four statements (S) and three deductions (D) from these statements
Statements and deductions
S1
Organisms produce a far greater number of progeny than ever give rise to mature individuals.
S2
The number of individuals in species remains more or less constant.
D1
Therefore, there must be a high mortality rate.
S3
The individuals in a species are not all identical, but show variations in their characteristics.
D2
Therefore, some variants will succeed better than others in the competition for survival. So the parents 
for the next generation will be selected from those members of the species better adapted to the 
conditions of the environment.
S4
Hereditary resemblance between parents and offspring is a fact.
D3
Therefore, subsequent generations will maintain and improve on the degree of adaptation of their 
parents, by gradual change. 
TOK
In 1858, Charles Darwin unexpectedly received a letter from a young naturalist, Alfred Russel 
Wallace. Wallace outlined a remarkably similar theory of natural selection to Darwin’s own. Wallace 
had come up with the idea while travelling in South East Asia. The men had developed the same 
theory independently. Why was this possible? Common experiences seem to have been crucial, and 
both had read similar books. For two individuals to arrive at one of the most important theories in 
science independently and at the same time is remarkable.
1	 Outline the theory 
of evolution by 
natural selection.
 
■Figure D4.1.1 Portrait 
of Charles Darwin, at an 
age when he travelled 
on the HMS Beagle 
and first developed 
his ideas of evolution 
by natural selection
Top tip!
Make sure that you 
really understand the 
concept of natural 
selection so you can 
apply it to unfamiliar 
situations. Do not just 
rote learn it.
 
■Figure D4.1.2 Charles 
Darwin’s vision of ‘descent 
with modification’ 
from his ‘B’ notebook


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.1   Natural selection
781
Nature of science: Theories
A paradigm shift is a significant and fundamental change in how the world is viewed. In Charles 
Darwin’s time, it was widely understood that species evolved, but the mechanism was not clear. 
Darwin’s theory provided a convincing mechanism and replaced Lamarckism. Paradigm shifts occur 
when scientific research contradicts previously held assumptions: Darwin’s (and Wallace’s) concept 
of natural selection replaced previously held views about the origin of species and is therefore an 
important example of a paradigm shift in scientific thinking. 
While Darwin initially may have had to rely on strong – but limited – evidence, and while his initial 
argument may have included much speculation, the strength of nearly 200 years of genetic research 
continues to support Darwin’s initial ideas. The fact that evolution by natural selection is called a 
scientific ‘theory’ underscores the highly grounded and evidenced nature of the ideas, even if they are 
prone to adjustment as further data are offered. The ‘theory’ is not speculation or even very speculative 
– all the available evidence, properly understood, supports Darwin’s ground-breaking ideas.
TOK
What is the role of paradigm shifts in the progression of 
scientific knowledge?
A scientific theory provides a framework within which to carry out research (investigations) and 
determines the types of research questions that a biologist thinks is appropriate to formulate and test. 
A new theory in biology replaces an old theory when the new theory is better supported by current 
data and when it gives a better explanation of biological phenomena.
A theory may be considered better because:
l	 it is more effective in giving a framework (tools and processes) for problem solving and making 
predictions
l	 it simply works better and is more useful (i.e. the results make further progress possible) – this is 
the ‘pragmatic theory of truth’
l	 it fits more consistently with other existing biological theories – this is the ‘coherence theory 
of truth’ 
l	 it seems, in terms of evidence, to more accurately reflect what is really there (in an independent 
external reality) – this is the ‘correspondence theory of truth’.
When an accepted scientific theory fails to explain increasingly anomalous data that do not fit in 
with the predictions of the theory, a scientific evolution occurs and a completely new hypothesis, 
theory or model is developed, which requires that old data and the anomalous data be interpreted 
in a totally new way. American philosopher Thomas Kühn (1922–96) called this sudden shift 
from the old theory to the new theory a paradigm shift. The most important paradigm shift in 
biology was probably the development and later acceptance of Darwin’s concept of evolution by 
natural selection.
Darwin’s publication of the Origin of Species in 1859 provided a simple explanation for the great 
diversity of life and showed that all living organisms, including humans (Homo sapiens), are related by 
descent from a common evolutionary ancestor. The view was ‘simpler’ than the creationist view in the 
sense that it did not need to postulate a divine being as the explanation for the diversity of life, a being 
which would then itself need explaining. His explanation of evolution via natural selection is the basis of 
all of biology and, in the words of the eminent geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900–75), ‘nothing 
in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution’. 
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
782
The roles of mutation and sexual 
reproduction in generating variation 
Natural selection can only occur if there is variation among members of the same species. 
The individuals in a species are not all identical but show variations in their characteristics. 
Today, modern genetics has shown us that there are several ways by which genetic variations arise. 
1	 Variation arises in sexual reproduction during both meiosis in gamete formation and fertilization.
We have seen that genetic variations arise via:
l	 random assortment of paternal and maternal chromosomes in meiosis (in the process of 
gamete formation, page 660)
l	 crossing over of segments of individual maternal and paternal homologous chromosomes 
(resulting in new combinations of genes on the chromosomes of the haploid gametes 
produced by meiosis, page 660)
l	 the random fusion of male and female gametes during fertilization.
These processes operate each time meiosis occurs and are followed by fertilization. The results 
are new combinations of existing characteristics that may favour individuals in their lifetime – 
they may affect survival and opportunities to reproduce. If so, a particular individual’s success 
in reproduction will result in certain alleles being passed on to the next generation in greater 
proportions than other alleles.
2	 Variations arise as the product of mutation (page 637), giving entirely new alleles. We have 
seen that mutations are changes in DNA. Mutations occurring in ovaries or testes (or anthers or 
embryo sacs of flowering plants) are called germ line mutations. Since these mutations occur 
in the cells that give rise to gametes, they may be passed to the offspring. Meanwhile, mutations 
that occur in body cells of multicellular organisms (somatic mutations) are only passed on to 
the immediate descendants of those cells, and they disappear when the organism dies. So, new 
characteristics acquired during the lifetime of an individual are not heritable.
As a result of all these factors, the individual offspring of parents are not identical. Rather, they 
show variations in their characteristics.
Overproduction of offspring and competition 
for resources
Darwin did not coin the phrase ‘struggle for existence’, but it does sum up the 
point that the overproduction of offspring in the wild leads naturally to their 
competition for resources. Table D4.1.2 is a list of the normal rate of production 
of offspring in some common species.
How many of these offspring survive to breed themselves?
In fact, in a stable population on average, a breeding pair gives rise to a single 
breeding pair of offspring. All their other offspring are casualties of the ‘struggle’; 
many organisms die before they can reproduce.
So, populations do not show rapidly increasing numbers in most habitats or, at least, not for long. 
Population size is naturally limited by restraints that we call environmental factors. These include 
space, light and the availability of food. These factors limit the carrying capacity of a species’ 
population. The never-ending competition for resources means that the majority of organisms fail to 
survive and reproduce. In effect, the environment can only support a certain number of organisms, 
Common 
mistake
When explaining 
the role of sexual 
reproduction in 
evolution, it is not 
enough to state that 
sexual reproduction 
produces variation 
– how the variation 
occurs also needs to 
be explained. It is not 
necessary to say what 
evolution is, but rather 
to explain how sexual 
reproduction facilitates 
evolution. The role 
of mutation does not 
need to be discussed, 
because this is not part 
of sexual reproduction.
2	 Describe 
how mutation 
and sexual 
reproduction lead 
to variation in 
populations.
 
■Table D4.1.2 Numbers of offspring produced
Organism
No. of eggs/seeds/young 
per brood or season
rabbit
8–12
great tit
10
poppy
6000
honey bee (queen)
120 000
cod
2–20 million
Link
Carrying capacity is 
covered in Chapter 
C4.1, page 557.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.1   Natural selection
783
and the number of individuals in a species remains more or less constant over a period of time. 
Overproduction of offspring and competition for resources are therefore factors that promote 
natural selection.
Abiotic factors as selection pressures
Abiotic factors are the non-living components of an ecosystem. These can act as density-
independent factors that may affect the survival of individuals in a population, causing numbers of 
individuals in a population to fluctuate (Chapter C4.1). An example of a density-independent factor 
is high or low temperatures. 
Common mistake
It is incorrect to refer to species ‘...adapted by developing new characteristics according to the 
different environments’. Instead, different environments will have different selective pressures on 
isolated populations of the same species, leading to different adaptations to the local environment.
Differences between individuals as 
the basis for natural selection
When genetic variation arises in organisms:
l	 the favourable characteristics are expressed in the phenotypes of some of the offspring
l	 these offspring may be better able to survive and reproduce in a particular environment; others 
will be less able to compete successfully to survive and reproduce.
Thus, natural selection operates to determine the survivors and the genes that are perpetuated 
in future progeny and results in offspring with favourable characteristics. In time, this selection 
process may lead to new varieties and new species. The operation of natural selection is sometimes 
summarized in the phrase survival of the fittest, although these were not words that Darwin used, 
at least not initially. Differences between individuals in adaptation, survival and reproduction are the 
basis for natural selection.
Fitness is a term used to refer to the survival value and reproductive potential of a genotype. 
To avoid the criticism that ‘survival of the fittest’ is a circular phrase (how can fitness be judged 
except in terms of survival?), the term ‘fittest’ is understood in a particular context. For example, the 
fittest of the wildebeest (hunted herbivores) of the African savannah may be those with the most 
acute senses, quickest reflexes and strongest leg muscles for efficient escape from predators. These 
adaptations relate to the genotype of members of the population – those with the alleles that confer a 
selective advantage are more likely to breed and pass on these alleles to future generations. By natural 
selection for these characteristics, the health and survival of wildebeests is assured. 
Natural selection is the result of intraspecific competition – competition between individuals of 
the same species. Individuals will usually interact with more members of their own species than of 
other species. Individuals of the same species share the same niche and so intraspecific competition 
plays a stronger role in evolution than interspecific competition (competition between individuals 
of different species) because in intraspecific competition, individuals compete for the same 
resources, and have the same biotic and abiotic interactions that influence the growth, survival and 
reproduction of the species. Any mutation that gives individuals in a population a selective advantage 
improves their chance of surviving intraspecific competition. 
Link
Abiotic factors as 
selection pressures 
is covered more 
in Chapter A4.2, 
page 164.
3	 List three abiotic 
factors that can 
act as selection 
pressures.
	
◆Fitness: an organism’s 
ability to pass its genetic 
material to its offspring, 
i.e. its reproductive 
success.
Link
Intraspecific 
competition is 
covered in Chapter 
C4.1, page 563. 
Niches are covered 
in Chapter B4.2, 
page 363.
Link
Examples of 
temperature as a 
density-independent 
factor are given in 
Chapter B4.1, pages 
344 and 354.
4	 Deduce the 
importance of 
modern genetics to 
the theory of the 
origin of species by 
natural selection.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
784
When the environment changes, some individuals present may be at a disadvantage. If so, natural 
selection is likely to operate on individuals and cause changes to gene pools. We have already noted 
that individuals possessing a particular allele, or combination of alleles, may be more likely to 
survive, breed and pass on their alleles than other less well-adapted individuals. This process is also 
referred to as ‘differential mortality’.
Requirement that traits are heritable 
for evolutionary change to occur
Genes are the heritable unit through which evolution occurs. Mutation and remixing of alleles 
following sexual reproduction produces new arrangements of the genetic code that are passed down 
through the generations. Characteristics acquired during an individual’s life due to environmental 
factors are not encoded in the base sequence of genes and so are not heritable.
As discussed in Chapter A4.1, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck put forward an explanation for change in 
species over time (page 139). His theory proposed that all the physical changes occurring in an 
individual during its lifetime can be inherited by its offspring (i.e. the inheritance of acquired traits). 
The theory influenced evolutionary thought throughout the first half of the nineteenth century. This 
was subsequently replaced by Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection, which is compatible 
with our current knowledge of genetics. 
Nature of science: Falsification
All theories are tentative and can be falsified. For example, the evidence Darwin gathered while 
on the Galápagos Islands during his journey on the Beagle falsified Lamarck’s earlier theory of 
evolution by inheritance of acquired traits. The theory of evolution by natural selection, in contrast 
to Lamarck’s theory, allows for prediction and explanation. The term ‘theory’ (as opposed to 
‘hypothesis’ or ‘conjecture’) indicates that a scientific community generally feels that the ideas 
provided by the theory are the best and most full explanation of the data available. 
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
 ATL D4.1B 
Why have organisms not evolved following the mechanism proposed by Lamarck (what is known as 
Lamarckism)? Read the following article: www.americanscientist.org/article/experimental-lamarckism
Summarize the main ideas of the article in 400 words. Use your knowledge of DNA and the 
molecular basis of inheritance to explain the ideas and concepts in the article.
 
■Natural selection in action: the peppered moth (Biston betularia)
During the Industrial Revolution in Britain, in the early part of the nineteenth century, air pollution 
by gases (such as sulfur dioxide) and solid matter (mainly soot) was distributed over the industrial 
towns, cities and surrounding countryside. Here, lichens and mosses on brickwork and tree trunks 
were killed off and these surfaces were blackened. The numbers of dark varieties of some 80 species 
of moth increased in these habitats during this period. This rise in proportion of darkened forms is 
known as industrial melanism. 
The dark-coloured (melanic) form of the peppered moth, Biston betularia, followed this trend in 
industrialised areas, but their numbers were low in unpolluted countryside, where pale, speckled 
forms of the moths were far more common (Figure D4.1.3). In sooty areas, the melanic form was 
effectively camouflaged from predation by insectivorous birds and became the dominant species.
Common 
mistake
‘Competition between 
individuals within a 
species’ should be 
referred to rather than 
‘competition between 
species’. Similarly, you 
should refer to fitter 
individuals within a 
population, which 
survive and pass on 
adaptive alleles, and 
not ‘survival of the 
fittest species’.
Top tip!
If you are taking HL, 
you will be aware 
that, in mammals, 
imprinted genes are 
not all stripped of their 
epigenetic tags, and 
so changes due to 
environmental factors 
are still heritable, even 
though they are not 
causing changes to 
the base sequence 
of genes.
Link
Evolution as change 
in the heritable 
characteristics of a 
population is covered 
in Chapter A4.1, 
page 138.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.1   Natural selection
785
melanic form 
observed in industrially 
polluted habitats
Biston betularia
pale form observed 
in non-polluted 
habitats
Key
melanic form
local population frequency
results of frequency studies in
polluted and unpolluted habitats
polluted habitat
pale form
evidence of
selective
predation
*
*
100
80
60
40
20
0
unpolluted habitat
100
80
60
40
20
0
local population frequency
mark–release–capture experiments using
laboratory-reared moths of both forms, in
polluted and unpolluted habitats
polluted habitat
100
80
60
40
20
0
unpolluted habitat
100
80
60
40
20
0
% of forms
% of forms
*
*
*
experimental evidence
 
■Figure D4.1.3 The peppered moth and industrial melanism
Tool 2: Technology 
Generating data from models and simulations
Although it is not possible to study the selection of the pale and melanic varieties of 
peppered moths in the wild, there are simulations available online that allow you to do 
this, e.g.:
https://askabiologist.asu.edu/peppered-moths-game/play.html
You can select either a dark, polluted forest (with trees covered by soot and no lichen) 
or a light, unpolluted forest (with trees covered in lichen). Run the programme on 
one type of forest – how many melanic and pale moths remain at the end of the 
experiment? Why is this? What does the experiment tell you about natural selection?
Repeat the experiment using the second forest type.
TOK
In the study of 
evolutionary history, 
do experiments 
have any part to 
play in establishing 
knowledge? If an 
experimental approach 
has a limited role, is 
the study of evolution 
a ‘science’?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
786
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing
Design an investigation using the peppered moth simulation. Which variable will 
you alter? Identify and justify your choice of dependent, independent and control 
variables. Justify the range and quantity of measurements you would take and explain 
your methodology.
For example, you could adjust the brightness of your computer screen to investigate 
how this affects the levels of predation, and selection pressure, on peppered moth 
populations. You need to ensure the control of variables that may affect your 
dependent variables, such as ensuring background lighting in the room is constant, and 
allowing the same amount of time for each experiment. 
The investigation should be replicated and mean results calculated. A control 
experiment could be carried out by running the simulation under full light intensity. 
Include screenshots from the simulation in the method and analysis, to clearly explain 
your methodology and results.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Sexual selection as a selection  
pressure in animal species
We have seen how alleles that confer an advantage in the 
phenotype of a species lead to the survival of individuals 
and the passing on of these adaptive alleles to subsequent 
generations. This can be shown in the evolution of the 
plumage of birds of paradise. Birds of paradise are found in the 
rainforests of Papua New Guinea in South East Asia. Alfred 
Russel Wallace was one of the first naturalists to observe these 
and other species of birds of paradise in the wild. Figure D4.1.4 
shows the Raggiana bird of paradise. The male bird is brightly 
coloured but the female is plain. 
Differences in physical appearance and courtship display in birds 
of paradise have led to the evolution of numerous species within 
the same forest. Male birds of paradise have bright and colourful 
feathers, which they use to attract females, and different species 
also have different dancing displays. Changes in the appearance 
or behaviour of populations may result in males and females of 
those populations no longer being attracted to each other and 
therefore not breeding together (see Chapter A4.1, page 147). 
In addition to acting as an isolating mechanism, this form of selection can result in sexual 
dimorphism, i.e. distinct difference in size or appearance between the sexes of an animal. In the 
majority of bird of paradise species, the male birds are brightly coloured and often perform elaborate 
courtship displays, whereas the female’s plumage is greys and browns (Figure D4.1.4). The 
differences between males and females is the result of sexual selection, which results in the 
development of physical and behavioural traits, usually in the male, which can be used as a sign of 
overall fitness. Females will choose the most impressive and attractive males based on their displays. 
 
■Figure D4.1.4 A male Raggiana bird of paradise 
(Paradisaea raggiana) displaying to a female in 
Varirata National Park, Papua New Guinea
	
◆Sexual dimorphism: 
differences in appearance 
between males and 
females of the same 
species, such as in colour, 
shape, size and structure.
	
◆Sexual selection: 
selection arising through 
preference by one sex for 
certain characteristics in 
individuals of the other sex.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.1   Natural selection
787
Bright feathers and an energetic dance are used to signal fitness of an individual to a female – those 
with the most impressive plumage and courtship display are more likely to attract a female and mate 
with her. Over time, the genes associated with these physical and behavioural traits are passed down 
and the characteristics become more prominent within the species. In this way, sexual selection can 
affect success in attracting a mate, and so drive the evolution of an animal population. 
Top tip!
Natural selection is the result of competition for resources, but sexual selection is the result of 
competition for mates. On an island with abundant resources and few predators, such as Papua New 
Guinea, females are the primary selection pressure in determining how males evolve. Sexual selection 
enhances mating success, while natural selection tends to produce individuals well-adapted to their 
environment. Sexual selection does not adapt the individuals to their environment.
Nature of science: Theories
Charles Darwin developed the concept of sexual selection, and it can be seen as his second great 
insight. He defined it as depending on the ‘advantage which certain individuals have over other 
individuals of the same sex and species solely in respect of reproduction’. Sexual selection can 
therefore be defined as intraspecific reproductive competition. Darwin made a clear distinction 
between natural selection and sexual selection – he realized that he needed to explain the existence 
of characteristics that were apparently not favoured by natural selection. Darwin said that sexual 
selection ‘depends not on the struggle for existence, but on the struggle between males for 
possession of females’.
Peacocks are the male of the species of peafowl. There are only three species of peafowl: Indian (Pavo 
cristatus), Green (Pavo muticus) and Congo (Afropavo congensis). Peacocks have bright, iridescent tail 
feathers with eye-spot patterning that are presented during courtship displays to a female (peahen) 
– see Figure D4.1.5.
Sexual selection has resulted in the tail feathers becoming 
increasingly long and more elaborately patterned over time. 
The tail reduces manoeuvrability, powers of flight and makes 
the bird more conspicuous – these traits make the bird more 
prone to predation and reduce the likelihood of survival. 
This demonstrates a key difference between natural selection 
and sexual selection: natural selection produces individuals 
well-adapted to their environment whereas sexual selection 
does not. Sexual selection enhances the chance of breeding 
success. Sexual selection can be seen as a stronger evolutionary 
force than natural selection because variation in mating 
success can amplify selection and maintain new genetic 
variation among individuals, which ultimately leads to rapid 
evolutionary change.
 
■Figure D4.1.5 Peacock (Pavo cristatus) displaying to a female


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
788
Nature of science: Experiments 
Testing sexual selection
The two sexes are similar in the barn swallow (Hirundo rustica), except for the outermost tail 
feather, which is about 16% longer in the male than the female. The French researcher Anders 
Møller tested whether females open-endedly prefer males with longer tails by experimentally 
shortening the tails of some males. He cut them off with a pair of scissors, and lengthened the tails 
of others by sticking those cut tail feathers on to other intact males with very fast drying superglue. 
He then measured how long it took the different males to find a female mate. Males with longer 
tails mated faster, resulting in higher reproductive success.
5	 Distinguish 
between natural 
selection and 
sexual selection.
Modelling of sexual and natural selection based 
on experimental control of selection pressures
Guppies (Poecilia reticulata) are a fish species native to the 
mountain forest streams of north-east Venezuela, Margarita, 
Trinidad and Tobago. They show complex variation in 
colouration and patterning (Figure D4.1.6), and sexual 
dimorphism (with brightly coloured males and drab females). 
Scientist John Endler carried out field work in forest streams 
in Trinidad and found that colour patterning varied with 
predation pressure. Following these observations, Endler 
designed and carried out both lab and field research on guppy 
populations to investigate the effects of natural and sexual 
selection on the evolution of the fish. 
Endler noted that guppies derive most of their camouflage from their spots. Spots, often quite large 
ones, resemble the gravel bottoms of their native streams. Some streams have coarser, more pebbly 
gravel and others finer, sandier gravel. Changing the environments and substrates affects survival 
because certain environments will provide more protection and hiding spots from predators. 
Hypotheses for varying levels of male colouration include:
1	 When there are predators present, the substrate type of the stream affects survival, leading to 
spot brightness on the guppies changing 
2	 Spot brightness on male guppies increases when there is a lack of predators or a low predation 
rate, due to sexual selection.
3	 High spot brightness attracts predators, so as predation increases, male guppy spot 
brightness decreases.
In his laboratory experiment, Endler used a greenhouse to resemble the tropical environment of 
the guppies. He set up ten ponds inside the greenhouse and put gravel on the bottom of the ponds: 
five ponds with coarse gravel and five with fine gravel. Endler predicted that when guppies were 
exposed to strong predation, the populations should diverge from each other, each evolving to match 
its own background. Where there was less predation, male guppies should tend to become more 
conspicuous to attract females. 
 
■Figure D4.1.6 Guppies (Poecilia reticulata) 
show a variety of colours and patterns
6	 Suggest why 
males and females 
of some species 
are different 
colours.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.1   Natural selection
789
At the start of the experiment, guppies were randomly assigned to the ten tanks and allowed to 
breed for six months with no predation. Endler then used three levels of predation: two ponds (one 
with fine and one with coarse gravel) had no predation, four ponds (two with coarse and two with 
fine gravel) contained a dangerous predator, the pike cichlid (Crenicichla alta), and in the remaining 
four ponds he introduced a weak predator, the killifish (Rivulus hartii). The different number of 
dangerous predators and weak predators was used to reflect the density of predators in the wild. 
After introducing the predators, the experiment ran for five months. Endler then counted and 
measured the spots on all the guppies. After nine more months, further data were recorded. 
Before the experiment, the guppies showed a wide range of spot size and number, reflecting the 
range of streams and predator content they were taken from. In the six months with no predation, 
the number of spots increased, presumably because of selection by females. At the point when the 
predators were introduced, there were significant changes:
l	 in the four ponds with the dangerous predator, the mean number of spots decreased
l	 in the ponds with no or weak predation, the number of spots continued to increase.
In the presence of either weak or strong predation, coarse gravel favoured larger spots whereas finer 
gravel favoured smaller spots. This can be interpreted as spot size mimicking gravel size. In the 
ponds with no predation, Endler found the reverse: fine gravel favoured large spots on male guppies 
and coarse gravel favoured small spots. He interpreted the results as males being more conspicuous 
if they do not match the background, which is good for attracting females.
In his field experiment, Endler transferred dull-coloured male guppies from an area with a dangerous 
predator (Crenicichla alta) to a region with a weak predator (Rivulus hartii) and left them for 15 guppy 
generations (two years). He then returned to study the effect of the transplants. In the stream with 
introduced fish, the males had evolved more colourful patterning, due to sexual selection and the 
absence of strong predation.
Endler’s experiments showed that the evolution in the guppy populations is a dynamic process of 
natural and sexual selection. Natural selection can occur in guppies as a response to the ability of 
finding food and avoiding predation. Predators can more easily see brightly coloured males, reducing 
their chance of survival, leading to selection of less highly coloured/spotted individuals. Sexual 
selection can also occur: traits beneficial for sexual selection (e.g. bright colouration) will confer a 
reproductive advantage. Males with greater brightness/spot colouration and size are more likely to 
mate, reproduce and pass on the alleles that code for these ornate characteristics. A trade-off 
between the two processes can be expected – in areas with high predation, it is less likely that 
brightly coloured males will survive, irrespective of their reproductive advantage.
 
■Interpreting the data
Data from Endler’s field and laboratory experiment are shown in Figure D4.1.7. The shaded bars 
represent the guppies in the greenhouse, while the unshaded bars represent the guppies from the 
field experiment. 
In both studies, the colour of the guppies was scored by counting the colour, brightness and number 
of spots after 15 generations.
Top tip!
You can read more 
about Endler’s 
experiments on 
guppies here: https://
evolution.berkeley.
edu/lines-of-evidence/
experiments


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
790
1
2
3
4
spots per fish
K
R
C
K
R
C
K
R
Black
Red
Yellow
Blue
Key
K = ponds with no predation
R = ponds with R. hartii (low predation)
C = ponds with C. alta (high predation)
Iridescent
Total
C
1
0
2
3
4
8
10
12
14
K
R
C
K
R
C
K
R
C
Analyse the data shown in the charts. Compare the data from the field and data from the greenhouse. 
Your summary should include a specific statement regarding how predation influences colouration.
 ATL D4.1C 
Endler also examined colour patterns, spot patterns and sizes of spots. Read Endler’s full paper 
‘Natural selection on color patterns in Poecilia reticulata’ here:  
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1558-5646.1980.tb04790.x
Look at Figures 1 (page 80) and 4 (page 85) from Endler’s paper and analyse the data shown. 
Summarize the data and explain the results. What is indicated by the convergence of x and r, and 
the divergence from c, in Figure 4?
Concept of the gene pool
Population genetics is the study of genes in populations (breeding groups). The total of all the genes 
and their different alleles present in a population make up a gene pool. A sample of the genes of the 
gene pool will form the genomes (gene sets of individuals) of the next generation, and so on, from 
generation to generation. 
When the breeding group is a large one, and all the individuals of the population have an equal 
opportunity of contributing gametes, random matings will maintain the original proportions of 
alleles in the population. In these circumstances, the allele frequency will not change. 
 
■Figure D4.1.7 Guppy 
experimental data: number 
of spots per fish in the 
greenhouse and in the 
field. Small vertical lines 
are two standard errors
	
◆Gene pool: all the 
genes (and their alleles) 
present in a breeding 
population.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.1   Natural selection
791
We can demonstrate this by setting two alleles of a gene at some arbitrary frequency in an infinitely 
large gene pool, and then following the frequency of possible genotypes these will produce by 
random matings over several generations. The example of two alleles, A and a, present in the 
population at frequencies of 0.8 and 0.2 is illustrated in Figure D4.1.8. Look at the single mating 
cycle illustrated there. You can see why the frequency of genes will not change after one cycle. In fact, 
this frequency will never change however many matings occur unless there are what geneticists call 
‘disturbing factors’ at work. 
When there is no change in a gene pool, we can say the population is not evolving. 
the fate of genes in a gene pool, where there are two alleles A and a, initially present in the frequencies 0.8
and 0.2 respectively
Question:
How does this frequency change during matings?
gene frequency
of ﬁrst generation
random fertilization with a
large number of matings
one mating cycle
illustrated here
the outcome is that gene frequencies do not change
gene pool:
0.8 A and 0.2 a
male gametes: 0.8 A + 0.2 a
female gametes 0.8 A + 0.2 a
genotype frequencies among progeny
A
A
A
A
A
0.8 A
0.2 a
A
A
A
a
a
genotype frequency
of ﬁrst generation
0.32 A
0.32 A
0.16 A
+
+
0.64 AA
0.32 Aa
0.04 aa
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
a
a
AA
0.64
A A A A A A A
a
a
Aa
0.16
Aa
0.16
aa
0.04
0.16 a
0.02 a
0.02 a
 
■Figure D4.1.8 The fate of genes in a gene pool
Allele frequencies of geographically 
isolated populations
In Chapter A3.1, we saw how the composition of gene pools can change (Figure A3.1.8, page 108), 
and in Chapter A4.1, we saw how changes to gene pools in isolated populations can lead to 
speciation (page 147). 
The composition of a gene pool can change due to a range of factors that may alter the proportions of 
some alleles. With one or more ‘disturbing factors’ operating, allele frequencies are likely to change 
from generation to generation. For example, some alleles may increase in frequency because of the 
advantage they give to the individuals that carry them. Because of these alleles, an organism may 
be more successful – producing more offspring, for example. If we can detect change in a gene pool 
(that is, if the proportions of particular alleles are altered) we may be seeing evolution before a new 
species is observed.
Link
Gene pools are also 
covered in Chapter 
A3.1, page 108, 
Chapter A4.1, page 
148, and Chapter 
D3.2, page 734.
7	 Predict the factors 
that may cause 
the composition 
of a gene pool 
to change. (Think 
about the changes 
that may take place 
in a population 
and between its 
members.)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
792
 
■Using databases to search for allele frequencies
Biological databases have been created to store data, such as genetic databases. These allow scientists 
to browse, share and compare data while doing research studies. In this section, we will look some 
databases to research allele frequencies.
NCBI Short Genetic Variation database
The NCBI Short Genetic Variation database (dbSNP) catalogues short variations in nucleotide 
sequences in humans. These variations include single nucleotide variations, including insertions, 
deletions and short tandem repeats less than 50 nucleotides in length.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp
The rsID number is a unique label (‘rs’ followed by a number) used by researchers and databases to 
identify a specific SNP (single-nucleotide polymorphism). It stands for Reference SNP cluster ID and 
is the naming convention used for most SNPs. To find the rsID number for a specific gene, go to: 
www.ensembl.org/index.html 
Using the Ensembl website, change ‘all species’ to ‘human’ in the search box, and underneath type 
in the gene of interest. For example, if researching the LPL gene, which provides instructions for 
making an enzyme called lipoprotein lipase, type ‘LPL’ in the search box under ‘human’. On the 
page that you are transferred to, select ‘variant’ on the left – this will show you variant SNPs for the 
gene. Each variant has a different rs number. Some variants produce disease or other clinical effects: 
type the rs number into an internet search engine to find out the phenotypic effect of the variant, if 
known. Select a variant of interest, for example rs268 for a variant of the LPL gene. 
Now access the dbSNP for the gene of your choice by typing the web address followed by the rs 
number; for example, for the LPL gene this is www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/rs268. The database 
shows you a table of a selection of worldwide locations and frequencies of the allele. ‘Ref’ is the allele 
included in the search, and ‘Alt’ is any other allele found at that locus on the chromosome. The 
Frequency tab lists the allele frequency data from major studies, broken down by subpopulation 
if available. This provides a way to evaluate the impact of a variant. If the gene has more than two 
alleles, the most common is shown. For example, the frequency of LPL globally is A = 0.983727 
and that of the alternate allele is G = 0.016273. These numbers refer to the frequency of the allele 
in the population, for example 0.5 would be 50% incidence. This is the notation used in the Hardy–
Weinberg equation (see page 796).
Top tip!
This website has further information and a video about the database:  
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/docs/gsr/alfa
This website has a factsheet about the database:  
https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/factsheets/Factsheet_SNP.pdf
Allele Frequency Net database
The following database contains allele frequencies for genes related to the immune system, such as 
the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system: www.allelefrequencies.net
The HLA system is a complex of genes on chromosome 6 in humans that encodes cell-surface 
proteins (antigens) responsible for the regulation of the immune system.
Click on the ‘populations’ tab at the top of the screen and ‘browse populations by geographic 
regions’. This enables you to select specific areas of the world and examine allele frequencies for the 
HLA system.
Link
For HL only students, 
the Hardy–Weinberg 
equation is covered 
later in Chapter D4.1, 
page 796.
Top tip!
Neo-Darwinism is a 
modified theory of 
Darwinism which 
explains the origin of 
species on a genetic 
basis. The main 
difference between 
them is that Darwinism 
describes favourable 
and inheritable 
phenotypic variations 
as the driving force of 
speciation, whereas 
neo-Darwinism 
states that it is only 
inheritable genetic 
variations that are 
the driving force 
of speciation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.1   Natural selection
793
Changes in allele frequency in the gene 
pool as a consequence of natural selection
When Darwin developed the theory of evolution by natural selection, he had no knowledge of DNA 
or Mendelian genetics. Despite this, his theory explains the evolution of life on Earth that is still used 
today. Following Darwin’s work, scientists have integrated genetics with natural selection: this is 
known as neo-Darwinism. This has allowed an explanation of how species evolve at the molecular 
level, i.e. changes in allele frequency in the gene pool are a consequence of natural selection between 
individuals according to differences in their heritable traits.
 ATL D4.1D 
Evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins (Figure D4.1.9) has 
written about neo-Darwinism in a variety of his books and 
essays. Two of his best-known works are The Selfish Gene 
and The Blind Watchmaker. These explore a gene-centred 
view of evolution. 
Which other scientists can you find who have developed 
a modern synthesis of evolution? Select one of the books 
they have written and write a review for a school magazine 
or journal.
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
 
■Figure D4.1.9 Professor 
Richard Dawkins – evolutionary 
biologist and science author
 
■Figure D4.1.10 Three different types of selection
Three modes of selection operating on phenotypic variation
directional
stabilizing
disruptive
before selection
after selection
numbers
degree of
variance
numbers
degree of
variance
numbers
degree of
variance
examples
directional selection is 
illustrated by multiple 
antibiotic resistance in 
bacteria (Figure C3.2.16, 
page 535)
stabilizing selection is 
illustrated by human birth 
weights and infant mortality 
figures (Figure D4.1.11, 
page 794)
disruptive selection is 
illustrated by feather 
colour in young, male lazuli 
buntings (Figure D4.1.12, 
page 795)
Concept: 
Change
Changes in allele 
frequency in the 
gene pool occur as 
a result of natural 
selection and other 
processes such as 
genetic drift.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
794
Differences between directional, 
disruptive and stabilizing selection
Natural selection operates to change the composition of gene pools, but the outcomes of this vary. 
We can recognize three different types of selection, and these are explained in Figure D4.1.10. 
In each case, selection results in a change in allele frequency.
Stabilizing selection occurs when there is an increase in frequency of an average trait. It is a 
mechanism that maintains a favourable characteristic and the alleles responsible for it, and 
eliminates variants and abnormalities that are useless or harmful. It determines the frequency 
and values for the variation seen in a population. Most populations probably undergo stabilizing 
selection. Our example (in Figure D4.1.11) comes from human birth records on babies born between 
1935 and 1946, in London. It shows there was an optimum birth weight for babies, where ‘optimum’ 
refers to the middle birth weight, and those with birth weights heavier or lighter were at a selective 
disadvantage. The data show how environmental factors can affect continuous variation of a trait in a 
population, and the mechanism which determines the range of values.
The data provide an
example of continuous
variation. The ‘middleness’
or central tendency of this
type of data is expressed
in three ways:
1  mode  (modal value) –
    the most frequent
    value in a set of values
2  median  – the middle
    value of a set of values
    where these are
    arranged in ascending
    order
3  mean  (average) – the
    sum of the individual
    values, divided by the
    number of values
percentage of population
20
15
5
10
the main graph shows the
birth weights of infants
born in a London hospital
1935–46 (histogram)
and the death rate in
relation to birth weight 
(broken line)
birth weight/lb
11
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
100
70
2
7
10
20
30
50
mortality/%
3
5
The birth weight of humans is inﬂuenced by environmental factors
(e.g. maternal nutrition, smoking habits, etc.) and by inheritance (about 50%). 
When more babies than average die at very low and very high birth weights,
this obviously affects the gene pool because it tends to eliminate genes for
low and high birth weights.
10
1
 
■Figure D4.1.11 Birth weight and infant mortality, a case of stabilizing selection
Directional selection may result from changing environmental conditions. In these situations, 
the majority form of an organism may become unsuited to the environment because of change. 
Some other alternative phenotypes may have a selective advantage. 
An example of directional selection is the development of resistance to an antibiotic by bacteria 
(Figure C3.2.16, page 535). Certain bacteria cause disease, and patients with bacterial infections 
are frequently treated with an antibiotic to help them overcome the infection. However, in a large 
population of a species of bacterium, some may carry a gene for resistance to the antibiotic in 
question. A ‘resistant’ bacterium has no selective advantage in the absence of the antibiotic and must 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.1   Natural selection
795
compete for resources with non-resistant bacteria. But, when the antibiotic is present, most bacteria 
in the population are killed. Resistant bacteria remain and create the future population, all of which 
now carry the gene for resistance to the antibiotic. The genome has been changed abruptly. 
Disruptive selection occurs when particular environmental conditions favour the extremes of a 
phenotypic range over intermediate phenotypes. Here, individuals of a species that show the extreme 
phenotypes have the highest fitness and those individuals with intermediate values are at a fitness 
disadvantage. To be ‘disruptive’ there are intermediate phenotypes, but individuals in between the 
extremes are less able to adapt to the environment and become less frequent over time. This 
phenomenon is shown by feather colour in young (yearling, i.e. one year or less in age) male lazuli 
buntings (Passerina amoena), native to North America. Adult birds show bright plumage 
(Figure D4.1.12), but yearling male birds take a year or two to develop full adult colouration.
The delayed maturation of colour means that yearling birds show a greater variation in colour than 
adults, with colouration ranging from dull brown to bright blue individuals (as bright as adult males). 
A study published in Nature in 2008 scored colouration from 14 for extremely dull males to 36 for 
extremely bright males (Figure D4.1.12).
The researchers showed that the dullest and brightest yearling males generally obtained better 
territories. Intermediate yearlings (i.e. with colour in between the two extremes) did not gain as 
good territories. Male birds in high-quality territories generally paired with females more frequently 
than males in poorer territories. This led to a bimodal pattern in pairing success because females 
preferentially paired with males in high-quality territories (i.e. with brown or brightly coloured 
males). In this case, data suggested that territorial quality was a key component in the disruptive 
selection shown here.
 
■Figure D4.1.12 Colourful male lazuli bunting with brown female
So, why do bright and dull yearlings obtain good territories, while 
intermediate males do not? Adult males may see dull, brown-
coloured yearlings as non-threatening, possibly because 
they resemble females, and so allow them to become 
resident in their area. Adult males also leave brightly 
coloured yearlings alone, perhaps seeing them as a threat. 
Therefore, both bright and dull yearling males can establish 
territories and attract females. However, yearling males 
with intermediate plumage are more often attacked by adult 
males and fail to obtain territories and a mate. This results 
in disruptive selection, favouring the colour extremes.
8	 Distinguish 
between 
stabilizing, 
directional 
and disruptive 
selection.
 ATL D4.1E 
The research in this example of disruptive selection came 
from a 2008 article in Nature, ‘Disruptive sexual selection for 
plumage coloration in a Passerine bird’. Read the article and see 
photographs of different individual feather colours here:
www.researchgate.net/publication/12258797_Disruptive_
sexual_selection_for_plumage_coloration_in_a_Passerine_bird
Can you find other examples of variation in a population that 
leads to selection for phenotypic extremes, and where individuals 
with intermediate values are at a fitness disadvantage?


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
796
Hardy–Weinberg equation and calculations 
of allele or genotype frequencies
We have noted that in any population:
l	 The total of the alleles of the genes located in the reproductive cells of the individuals makes up a 
gene pool. A sample of the alleles of the gene pool will contribute to form the genomes (gene sets 
of individuals) of the next generation, and so on, from generation to generation.
l	 When the gene pool of a population remains more or less unchanged, that population is not 
evolving. If the gene pool of a population is changing (the proportions of particular allele pairs is 
altered), then evolution may be happening.
How can we detect change or constancy in gene pools?
The answer is by a mathematical formula called the Hardy–Weinberg equation.
The general formula to represent the frequency of dominant and recessive alleles is:
p + q = 1
where p = frequency of the dominant alleles
and q = frequency of the recessive alleles.
The problem in estimating gene frequencies is that it is not possible to distinguish between 
homozygous dominants and heterozygotes based on their appearance or phenotype, as has been 
noted previously (page 732). The Hardy–Weinberg equation overcomes this problem:
	
p2	
+	
2pq	
+	
q2	
=	
1
	
frequency of  
dominant homozygous 
individuals
	 +	
frequency of 
heterozygous 
individuals
	
+	
frequency of  
homozygous  
recessive individuals
	
=	 TOTAL
 
■Using the Hardy–Weinberg formula
We can use the Hardy–Weinberg formula to find the frequency of a gene in cases of dominance in 
which we are unable to distinguish between the homozygous dominants and the heterozygotes on 
the basis of phenotype. 
In humans, the ability to taste the chemical phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) is conferred by the 
dominant allele T. Both the dominant homozygotes (TT) and the heterozygotes (Tt) are ‘tasters’. 
The non-tasters are the recessive homozygotes (tt).
In a sample of a local population in Western Europe of 200 people, 130 (65%) were tasters and 
70 (35%) were non-tasters (Table D4.1.3).
 
■Table D4.1.3 Tasters and non-tasters
Phenotypes
Tasters
Non-tasters
Genotypes
TT + Tt
tt
Frequency
0.65
0.35
Applying these data to the Hardy–Weinberg equation, we know the value of q2 to be 0.35.
Taking the square root, the value of q = 0.59.
So, the frequency of the non-tasting alleles (t) in this European population was 0.59. 
Top tip!
The proportion of 
alleles in a population 
is called the allele 
frequency. The 
frequency of an allele 
can vary from 0 to 1. 
The frequencies of two 
alleles of any given 
gene must add up to 
1, e.g. if the frequency 
of the allele for blue 
eyes is 0.25 then the 
frequency of the allele 
for brown eyes must 
be 0.75.
Concept: 
Continuity
In population 
genetics, if allele 
frequencies 
remain unchanged 
and match 
Hardy–Weinberg 
conditions, then this 
indicates stability 
and continuity in 
the genotype.
Top tip!
Allele frequencies 
are likely to be 
very different in 
geographically isolated 
populations compared 
to the original 
populations, due to 
natural selection, 
mutation and random 
genetic drift.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.1   Natural selection
797
9	 In two small isolated populations the incidence of PTC non-tasters was as shown in the 
table. Calculate the frequency of the non-tasting alleles in each of the two 
sample populations. 
Population
Sample size
Number of non-tasters
Indigenous Australians
500
245
Indigenous North Americans
500
 20
Top tip!
Remember to use p 
and q to denote the 
two allele frequencies. 
It is important to 
understand that 
p + q = 1 so genotype 
frequencies are 
predicted by the 
Hardy–Weinberg 
equation: p2 + 2pq + q2 
= 1. If one of the 
genotype frequencies 
is known, the allele 
frequencies can be 
calculated using the 
same equations.
 
■Hardy–Weinberg conditions that must be maintained for a 
population to be in genetic equilibrium
If genotype frequencies in a population do not fit the Hardy–Weinberg equation, this indicates that 
one or more of the conditions is not being met, for example mating is non-random or survival rates 
vary between genotypes. 
When the gene pool of a population remains more or less unchanged, then this indicates that the 
population is not evolving. If the gene pool of a population is changing (the proportions of particular 
allele pairs is altered), then evolution may be happening.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Collecting data; interpreting results
Look back at Endler’s experiments on guppies on 
page 788. Then access the following guppy evolution 
simulation, which lets you explore the causes of evolution 
and Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium: www.labxchange.org/
library/items/lb:LabXchange:d884c485:lx_simulation:1
Click ‘start simulation’ and then read the background 
information section (select the tab at top of screen). 
You can alter one of several different variables to 
investigate the effect of this on two alleles:
p = wt allele, ornamental (wild-type) allele 
q = gol allele, drab (golden) allele
Select the ‘Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium’ tab. The 
simulation tracks the population dynamics of a wild‑type 
allele and a golden allele. In the wild-type allele, guppies 
produce visible ornamentation in their skin. The golden 
allele has a mutation that leads to less pigmented 
skin. Pigmentation seems to drive sexual selection in 
wild populations.
Work in pairs to explore the effects of different 
variables on allele frequency. Variables you can 
manipulate include level of predation, the salinity of the 
water, the mutation rate (which will affect the rate of 
evolution of the guppy populations) and migration rate 
(movement into the population from external areas). 
You can also change habitat.
Change one factor and then run the simulation to see 
the effect on the frequency of the two alleles. Then 
select a different factor. Did the outcomes match your 
predictions? Identify, describe and explain patterns, 
trends and relationships from your investigations.
Artificial selection by deliberate choice of traits
Artificial selection is carried out in crop plants and domesticated animals by choosing individuals 
for breeding that have desirable traits. Unintended consequences of human actions, such as the 
evolution of resistance in bacteria when an antibiotic is used (page 534), are due to natural rather 
than artificial selection.
10	Explain the key difference between natural and artificial selection.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 How do intraspecific interactions differ from interspecific interactions?
2	 What mechanisms minimize competition? 
Links
Artificial selection 
(selective breeding) 
is covered in Chapter 
A4.1, page 141. 
Bacterial resistance to 
antibiotics is covered 
in Chapter C3.2, 
page 534.
