Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
798
D4.2
Stability and change
•	 What features of ecosystems allow stability over unlimited time periods?
•	 What changes caused by humans threaten the stability of ecosystems?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D4.2.1 	 Stability as a property of natural ecosystems
	 D4.2.2 	 Requirements for stability in ecosystems
	 D4.2.3 	 Deforestation of Amazon rainforest as an example of a possible tipping point in 
ecosystem stability
	 D4.2.4 	 Role of keystone species in the stability of ecosystems
	 D4.2.5 	 Assessing sustainability of resource harvesting from natural ecosystems
	 D4.2.6 	 Factors affecting the sustainability of agriculture
	 D4.2.7 	 Eutrophication of aquatic and marine ecosystems due to leaching
	 D4.2.8 	 Biomagnification of pollutants in natural ecosystems
	 D4.2.9 	 Effects of microplastic and macroplastic pollution of the oceans
	 D4.2.10 	Restoration of natural processes in ecosystems by rewilding
	 D4.2.11 	Ecological succession and its causes (HL only)
	 D4.2.12 	Changes occurring during primary succession (HL only)
	 D4.2.13 	Cyclical succession in ecosystems (HL only)
	 D4.2.14 	Climax communities and arrested succession (HL only)
Stability as a property of natural ecosystems
Ecosystems are open systems that are supported by input of energy and matter. Sunlight or energy 
from chemical reactions ensure that producers synthesize glucose, which supports the whole food 
chain. Inputs of matter, from organisms entering the ecosystem or the input of inorganic material 
(e.g. carbon dioxide), provide the elements from which biological molecules are created, such as 
carbohydrates, lipids and proteins. Given an ongoing supply of energy and matter, ecosystems are 
sustainable. The term stability has many definitions, but in terms of ecosystems it can be defined as 
the ability to maintain or support systems and processes continuously over time. There is evidence 
for some ecosystems on Earth persisting for millions of years, such as the rainforests of South East 
Asia, which are estimated to be at least 70 million years old (Figure D4.2.1). Steady conditions, with 
high inputs of rainfall and sunlight throughout the year, combined with warm temperatures, have 
ensured the stability of these ecosystems, at least until the advent of humanity. 
Concept: Continuity
Stability represents continuity within ecosystems. Inputs of energy and matter, and 
nutrient cycling, support and maintain ecosystems.
	
◆Stability: the ability 
to maintain or support 
systems and processes 
continuously over time.
Link
Ecosystems as open 
systems is covered 
in Chapter C4.2, 
page 579.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
799
 
■Figure D4.2.1 Rainforest at Danum Valley, Malaysia
 ATL D4.2A 
Find out about the age of ecosystems in the area where you live. What are the oldest ecosystems? 
Why have they survived unchanged for such long periods of time? What are the characteristics 
that determine the longevity of natural systems?
Requirements for stability in ecosystems
For an ecosystem to remain stable it requires a continual supply of energy, nutrient recycling, a 
diversity of organisms and a climate that remains within tolerance levels for the species living there.
In Chapter C4.2 we saw how transfers of energy and matter are essential in the maintenance of 
ecosystems. We also saw how the recycling of all chemical elements is needed to support living 
organisms in ecosystems. Energy and the recycling of nutrients contribute to the stability of 
ecosystems. Ecosystems require constant inputs of energy and matter, and the recycling of nutrients 
within an ecosystem adds additional stability.
Genetic diversity refers to the range of genetic material present in a gene pool or population of a 
species. Although the term normally refers to the diversity within one species, it can also be used to 
refer to the diversity of genes in all species within an area. Ecosystems that are complex (supported 
by a large biomass of producers) lead to an increased number of niches, which increases species and 
genetic diversity, resulting in greater stability. Ecosystems that contain species with small population 
sizes can lead to low genetic diversity, which leaves species more prone to disease.
Biome distribution is determined by climatic variables that need to remain within tolerance levels for 
the plant species that are found there. These climatic variables include temperature, precipitation and 
insolation (page 354). The type of stable ecosystem that will emerge in an area is predictable based 
on climate. If conditions vary from tolerance levels, the survival of the ecosystem can be threatened 
(as we will see in the case of the Amazon rainforest, below).
Link
Transfers of energy 
and matter in 
ecosystems is covered 
in Chapter C4.2, page 
578; the recycling of 
chemical elements 
in ecosystems is on 
page 601.
Link
Biodiversity as the 
variety of life in all 
its forms is covered 
in Chapter A4.2, 
page 156.
Link
Abiotic factors as 
the determinants 
of terrestrial biome 
distribution is covered 
in Chapter B4.1, 
page 354.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
800
Deforestation of Amazon rainforest 
as an example of a possible tipping 
point in ecosystem stability
Tipping points occur when there is a dramatic change in the ecological state away from stability. 
They represent points beyond which irreversible change or damage occurs. Equilibrium refers to a 
state of balance among the components of a system. Positive feedback loops tend to amplify changes 
and drive the system towards a tipping point where a new equilibrium is adopted (Figures D4.2.2 
and D4.2.3b). Such changes are caused by human population growth and associated factors, such as:
l	 resource consumption
l	 habitat transformation and fragmentation
l	 energy production and consumption
l	 climate change.
All these factors exceed, in both rate and magnitude, the changes seen in the most recent global-
scale shift in equilibrium at the end of the last ice age. Most projected tipping points are linked to 
climate change (Chapter D4.3). Increases in carbon dioxide levels above a certain value (450 ppm) 
would lead to increased global mean temperature, causing melting of the ice sheets and permafrost.
disturbance
time
system
state
 
■Figure D4.2.2 Unstable equilibrium: the system moves to a new equilibrium following disturbance
a
b
 
■Figure D4.2.3 Diagrams showing the difference between (a) stable and (b) unstable equilibrium
Concept: Change
Disturbance to ecosystems and positive feedback mechanisms can move them away 
from stability and towards tipping points. Change to ecological systems can lead to 
ecosystem collapse.
	
◆Tipping point: a 
critical threshold when 
even a small change can 
have dramatic effects and 
cause a disproportionately 
large response in the 
overall system.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
801
 
■Deforestation of Amazon rainforest
The Amazon is a rainforest biome that spans nine countries in South America: Brazil, Bolivia, 
Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana. The rainforest covers 
6 million km2 and contains half of the planet’s remaining tropical forests.
Economic, ecological and climatic systems in Amazonia may now be interacting in ways that will 
move the forest beyond a tipping point. Chapter C4.2 discusses how fires in the Amazon are caused 
by increased frequency of drought conditions (page 598). Burning and deforestation of the Amazon 
rainforest to make space for grazing land or housing, and to provide timber, leads to loss of large 
areas of rainforest. Illegal mining operations also lead to loss of forest habitat. Remaining areas 
can become fragmented, forming islands of habitat. Continued burning and clearance, and the 
establishment of grasslands, prevents re-establishment of rainforest. 
A large area of rainforest is needed for the generation of atmospheric water vapour by continuous 
transpiration, with consequent cooling, air flows and rainfall. There is scientific uncertainty over the 
minimum area of rainforest that is sufficient to maintain these processes.
Climate change further reinforces many of these processes by increasing air temperatures, dry season 
severity and the frequency of extreme weather events. One projection from a 2008 paper in the 
journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences suggests that by 2030, 24% of 
the Amazon rainforest will be damaged by drought or logging and 31% of the Amazon’s closed-canopy 
forest will be deforested (Figure D4.2.5). If ‘business as usual’ continues, logging will further reduce 
the Amazonian forest carbon store size by 15%; drought damage will cause another 10% reduction 
in forest biomass. More recent studies, such as a January 2022 World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 
briefing at the Westminster Hall debate on deforestation in the Amazon, suggest 40% of the Amazon 
rainforest will be lost by 2050. The effects of more frequent fires could release an additional 20% of 
forest carbon to the atmosphere. Thus, some predicted 15–26 billion tonnes of carbon contained in 
the Amazon will be released to the atmosphere in less than 30 years as a result of large-scale dieback. 
Key   
Forest
Deforested
Logged forest
Forested areas 
under stress from 
increased aridity
 
■Figure D4.2.4 Projected status of the Amazon rainforest, 2030, showing drought-
damaged, logged and cleared forest assuming ‘business as usual’
Link
The release of 
carbon dioxide into 
the atmosphere 
during combustion 
of biomass, peat, 
coal, oil and natural 
gas is covered 
in Chapter C4.2, 
page 597.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
802
Tool 3: Mathematics
Calculating and interpreting percentage change
To assess the extent of deforestation in the Amazon 
rainforest, we can calculate the percentage change 
from the original area of forest. Figure D4.2.6 shows 
deforestation of the Amazon rainforest. Sequences of 
such photos are available that show the loss of rainforest 
over time. 
These photos can be used to estimate forest 
cover at different points in time, and these data 
used to calculate percentage change using the 
following formula:
percentage change = change in forest cover
initial forest cover  × 100
Where change in forest cover = final forest cover − 
initial forest cover.
The following site has data you can use: https://
rainforests.mongabay.com/amazon/deforestation_
calculations.html
For example, in 2017 estimated natural forest cover in 
the Brazilian Amazon (Amazonia) was 3 399 308 km2, 
and in 2018 it was 3 390 835 km2.
The percentage change in forest cover therefore:
= 3 390 835 – 3 399 308
3 399 308
 × 100
= – 
8473
3 399 308
 × 100
= –0.25%
A negative sign in percentage change calculations 
represents a loss.
This is a yearly change in forest cover. In terms of 
overall change from the original area of forest cover, 
the total percentage change is:
Original estimated forest cover (pre-1970) 
= 4 100 000 km2
Area of natural forest cover in 2018 = 3 390 835 km2.
The percentage change in forest cover is therefore
= 3 390 835 – 4 100 000
4 100 000
 × 100
= –  709 165
4 100 000
 × 100
= –17.30%
This calculation shows that 17.3% of Amazonia natural 
forest cover has been lost since 1970. A tipping point 
may be reached at 20% to 25% of deforestation.
 
■Figure D4.2.5 Satellite photo showing 
deforestation in the Amazon rainforest
Use of a model to investigate the effect 
of variables on ecosystem stability
The stability of an ecosystem may change when an external ‘disturbing’ factor that disrupts the natural 
balance is applied. An investigation of this may be attempted in natural habitats or in experimental, 
enclosed systems called a mesocosm. Both approaches have advantages and drawbacks (Table D4.2.1).
	
◆Mesocosm: enclosed 
environments that allow 
a small part of a natural 
environment to be 
observed under controlled 
conditions.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
803
 
■Table D4.2.1 Alternative approaches to investigating ecosystem stability
A natural ecosystem, for example an 
entire pond or lake
A small-scale laboratory model aquatic 
system (a mesocosm)
Advantages
realistic – actual environmental conditions 
are experienced
able to control variables – opportunity to 
measure the degree of stability or extent of 
change in a community, and to investigate 
the precise impact of a disturbing factor 
Disadvantages
variable conditions – minimum or non-
existent control over ‘controlled variables’
unrealistic – possibly of disputed relevance 
and applicability to natural ecosystems
Mesocosms are enclosed experimental areas that are set up to explore ecological relationships. 
Because they are contained experimental areas, they can be closely controlled and variables 
monitored. Studying natural ecosystems can be difficult because there are so many variables that 
cannot be controlled – mesocosms enable all variables other than the independent and dependent 
variable to be kept constant, so as to ensure a fair test.
Sealed glass vessels can be used for mesocosms because entry and exit of matter can be prevented, 
but light can enter and heat can leave. Both aquatic and terrestrial systems can be used.
The stability of an ecosystem may change when an external ‘disturbing’ factor that disrupts 
the natural balance is applied. Investigation of this may be attempted in natural habitats or in 
experimental, enclosed systems. Mesocosms can be used as an enclosed system to investigate the 
effect of altering one variable on the stability of an ecosystem. Both approaches have advantages and 
drawbacks, as detailed in the table above.
Nature of science: Experiments
Care and maintenance of the mesocosms should meet with the standards of the IB ethical 
experiment policy. Make sure you recognize and address any relevant safety, ethical and 
environmental issues when you are investigating mesocosms. 
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Designing 
Set up a mesocosm to investigate the effect of 
changing one variable on the stability of the system. 
For example, in an aquatic system you could set up 
one mesocosm with fish and the other without fish to 
investigate the effect of fish on the aquatic ecosystem.
When setting up the mesocosm you need to consider:
l	 What variables will you be controlling (keeping the 
same) and why? What effect might these variables 
have on the system if they are changed (i.e. why do 
you need to control them)?
l	 For terrestrial mesocosms, large glass jars can be 
used, although plastic containers can be just as 
effective. Which will you use, and why? Should the 
sides of the container be transparent or opaque?
l	 Which groups of organisms will you need to 
include in the mesocosm? Think of the organisms 
that would be present in a natural ecosystem (e.g. 
autotrophs, consumers and decomposers).
l	 Because the mesocosm will be sealed, you need 
to consider how the organisms will obtain fresh 
sources of oxygen. Photosynthetic organisms will 
ensure a supply of oxygen, but how will you ensure 
these are kept alive?
l	 Because the mesocosm is a closed system there is a 
danger that the organisms in it will suffer from lack 
of food, competition, excess heat, and so on. How 
will you ensure the well-being of the organisms in 
your mesocosm?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Concept: 
Continuity 
and change
Mesocosms can 
be used to study 
the factors that 
maintain stability in 
ecosystems, and also 
how altering biotic 
or abiotic factors 
can lead to change.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
804
Lakes and ponds where there is an excess of nutrients can undergo a process called eutrophication. 
Excess nutrients may come from fertilizer run-off from surrounding land, for example. The excess 
nitrates and phosphates provide high-levels of nutrition for algae, which undergo rapid population 
growth (an algal bloom occurs). The algae block light to underwater plants which die, providing 
detritus for bacteria to feed on – these bacteria undergo rapid growth and remove oxygen from the 
water, causing fish and other aquatic animals to die. A few organisms can survive in these conditions 
and prosper, but the death of many aquatic organisms results.
Could a mesocosm be set up to investigate eutrophication, so avoiding the destruction of a 
natural ecosystem?
A Experiment mesocosm
 B Control mesocosm
magnetic stirrer
?
Possible steps to the investigation
– what ‘control’ flask is required?:
1 Set up of mesocosms A (experiment) and B 
(control) with identical cultures of algal 
suspensions in pond water. Allowed to stabilize, 
and give evidence of normal algal growth
2 Addition of a quantity of concentrated 
phosphate solution to A
What would the control flask require?
3 Regular monitoring of change in algal cell 
density and O2 concentration in A and B 
mesocosms
Issues: Does an algal bloom develop?
How do the patterns of algal cell densities and O2 
concentration change with time?
port for probes to 
measure temperature, 
light (controlled variables) 
and O2 concentration (as 
a dependent variable)
port for sampling for algal 
density (as a dependent 
variable) and point of entry of 
additional phosphate ions (in 
solution) (independent variable)
light source/identical 
light/dark regimes
data logging/
recording device
 
■Figure D4.2.6 An experimental mesocosm investigating the effect of nutrient enrichment
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Concluding; evaluating
Carry out the investigation laid out in Figure D4.2.7, 
investigating the effect of nutrient enrichment:
l	 Is the mesocosm an appropriate practical investigation 
of eutrophication under controlled laboratory 
conditions? What changes might be made?
l	 Two dependent variables have been proposed in 
this experiment rather than just one. Why?
l	 If the additional phosphate ions added to 
mesocosm (A) resulted in an algal bloom, how 
would the control (B) be arranged to establish that 
phosphate ions influx caused it?
l	 How would you expect the oxygen concentrations 
in both mesocosms to change over an 
extended period?
l	 Compare the outcomes of the investigation to the 
accepted scientific context.
l	 Evaluate the implications of methodological 
weaknesses, limitations and assumptions on 
your conclusions.
l	 Explain what realistic and relevant improvements 
you could make to the investigation.
	
◆Eutrophication: 
the natural or artificial 
enrichment of a body of 
water, particularly with 
respect to nitrates and 
phosphates. There are 
both natural and human 
causes of eutrophication.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
805
Role of keystone species in the 
stability of ecosystems
In architecture, a keystone is a central stone at the apex (top) of an arch. The keystone supports the 
whole structure – without it, the arch would collapse (see Figure D4.2.8). 
 
■Figure D4.2.7 An arch from the Temple of Hadrian, 
Ephesus, Turkey. The keystone (the central stone) 
supports the arch – without it the arch would collapse
 
■Figure D4.2.8 An agouti (Dasyprocta sp.) – a keystone species
The concept of a ‘keystone’ has been applied to ecology. In communities, certain species are vital for 
the continuing function of the ecosystem. Without them, a fundamental shift in the community 
takes place; it effectively ‘collapses’. Such organisms are, therefore, ‘keystones’ for the ecosystem. 
Just as the keystone is not under the greatest pressure in the arch (this is focused on stones lower 
down), a keystone species may be only a relatively small part of the ecosystem in terms of biomass 
or productivity, but it still plays a fundamental role in the community. These species have a 
disproportionate impact on community structure and there is a risk of ecosystem collapse if they 
are removed. 
An example of a keystone species is the agouti of tropical South and Central America (see Figure 
D4.2.9), which feeds on the nuts of the Brazil nut tree. The Brazil nut tree (Bertholletia excelsa) is a 
hardwood species that is found from eastern Peru and northern Bolivia across the Brazilian Amazon, 
and some specimens are among the oldest and tallest (they grow up to 50 m) trees in the Amazon. 
The agouti is a large forest rodent, and the only animal with teeth strong enough to open the Brazil 
nut tree’s tough seed pods, to access the nuts inside. 
The agouti buries many of the nuts around the forest floor for times when the Brazil nuts are less 
abundant. Inevitably, the agouti does not remember to dig up and eat all these buried seeds, and the 
remaining ones are able to germinate and grow into adult plants. Without the agouti, the Brazil nut 
tree would not be able to distribute its seeds and the species would eventually die out. Without the 
Brazil nut tree, other animals and plants that depend on it would be affected, such as harpy eagles 
that use them for nesting sites. Brazil nuts are one of the most valuable non-timber products found in 
the Amazon: they are used as a protein-rich food source, and their extracted oils are a popular 
ingredient in many cosmetic products. The collection and sale of Brazil nuts provides an important 
source of income for many local communities. 
Concept: Continuity
Keystone species are essential species within a community; they maintain the continuity 
and stability of ecosystems.
	
◆Keystone species: 
a species which has a 
disproportionately large 
effect on community 
structure relative to 
its abundance. 
 ATL D4.2B 
Find out about a 
keystone species in an 
ecosystem from your 
local area or region. 
What is the effect of 
the keystone species on 
the ecosystem? What 
would happen the 
species was removed?
1	 Outline the role 
of a keystone 
species in an 
ecosystem.
Top tip!
Using the analogy of a 
keystone in architecture 
is a good way of 
remembering the 
importance of keystone 
species in ecosystems 
– if the stone/species 
is removed, the arch/
ecosystem collapses.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
806
Assessing sustainability of resource 
harvesting from natural ecosystems
Renewable resources are ones that continue to exist despite being consumed or ones that can 
replenish themselves naturally over a period of time even as they are used. Humans use natural 
resources for food and materials. Sustainability depends on the rate of harvesting being lower than 
the rate of replacement. If used sustainably, renewable resources can be used indefinitely.
 
■Terrestrial plant species
Trees are a renewable natural resource, providing they are replanted at the same rate as they are 
harvested. Trees are used to produce a large variety of different materials such as paper, cardboard 
and furniture. Tree chemicals are used to produce food, medicine and rubber.
Finland has promoted the multi-functionality of the forests as an important part of forest management 
and sustainability. Over 70% of the country is forested and the majority (61%) of Finland’s forests are 
privately owned. Finland’s sustainable forest management is based on balancing economic, social and 
environmental aspects of the forest. The Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) is one of the four main logged trees 
in Finland (Figure D4.2.10). The sustainability of harvesting trees can be assessed by surveying soil 
disturbance and forest structure in logged and unlogged sites. To achieve sustainable harvesting the 
amount of replanting needs to exceed the number of trees cut down. The volume of timber extracted 
can be measured and new trees planted which, once fully grown, will replace the extracted timber. The 
long-term life of the forest is prioritized over short-term profits. In 2019, the President of the Republic 
of Finland, Sauli Niinistö, said that Finland is committed to achieving carbon neutrality by 2035 and 
become carbon negative soon after that. Forests provide an important storage of carbon (page 595) so, 
for forests to remain sustainable, the volume of timber removed needs to be replaced by new growth.
 
■Figure D4.2.9 Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) plantation and harvest
 
■Marine fish
Fish are an important source of food for many human populations. Most fish populations that are 
exploited commercially as food sources are marine species, and it is commonly the case that the 
populations are shared among a few harvesting countries. Fishing vessels from many nations take 
their harvest from common waters and overfishing is a global issue. Chapter A4.2 discusses how 
overharvesting has impacted wild populations of animals (page 170). Overfishing of the Atlantic (or 
North Sea) cod (Gadus morhua) led to a collapse of fish stocks (see Figure A4.2.11, page 170). 
Top tip!
Sustainability 
depends on the rate 
of harvesting being 
lower than the rate of 
replacement. If removal 
exceeds the rate of 
replenishment of the 
resources, for example 
forests harvested at 
a faster rate than 
they can regrow, 
then resource use 
is unsustainable.
	
◆Sustainability: the 
responsible maintenance 
of ecological systems so 
that there is no reduction 
of conditions for future 
generations, ensuring 
the long-term viability of 
a system.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
807
If populations of fish are persistently overfished (as they regularly are), stocks will be rapidly depleted 
to the point where they collapse and can no longer support a commercial fishery. The extent to 
which species are fished should be based on population dynamics that consider their reproductive 
and growth rates. Population size and age structure can be used to inform practices associated with 
sustainable fishing. 
The effect of population size, age and reproductive status on sustainable 
fishing practices
Sustainable fishing practices are those that use methods of catching fish that do not diminish the 
fish stock. For example, this can be done to establish the sustainability of Atlantic cod. The 
maximum sustainable yield (MSY) of a stock represents the maximum average catch that a stock 
can sustain over a long period of time. This catch corresponds to the optimum balance between the 
reproductive rate and growth rate of the stock and the deaths due to harvesting and natural 
mortality. Typically, harvesting at MSY requires much lower fishing rates than occur in many 
fisheries. If fish were harvested at the MSY then fishing would be able to continue in a sustainable 
way. A growing fish population is indicated by having a relatively larger number of younger fish, 
whereas a declining population would have a larger number of older fish. Such population age 
structures can, along with population size, indicate whether fishing methods are sustainable or not. 
Calculation of MSY requires good knowledge of the relationship 
between the size of the stock and the number of juveniles 
produced each year. The natural variation in the number of 
juveniles produced annually makes establishing this relationship 
difficult. It usually requires a very long series of data – at least 
20 years’ worth. Nevertheless, there are reliable methods that 
provide an adequate approximation to MSY. This method relies 
on the cooperation of the fishing community – because estimates 
of fish stocks rely on accurate measurement of age structure. 
Any operators who work outside the regulations and discard 
restricted fish at sea before returning to port create skewed data 
that can lead to a miscalculation of stock size.
Factors affecting the sustainability 
of agriculture
Humans started to grow food using agriculture around 10 000 years ago. Today, it provides the 
majority of food for human societies.
Various physical factors can affect agriculture, such as:
l	 precipitation: type, frequency, intensity, amount
l	 temperature: growing season (>6 °C), ground frozen (0 °C), range of temperatures
l	 soil: fertility, nutrient status, structure, texture, depth
l	 pests: vermin, locusts, disease
l	 location: slope gradient, relief, altitude, aspect (shady or sunny).
Environmental impacts, such as pollution, habitat loss, reduction in biodiversity and soil erosion, 
determine whether agriculture is sustainable or not. 
When forests or other ecosystems are cleared for agriculture, soil is exposed and this can lead to 
soil erosion. Fertile soil can be considered a non-renewable resource because, once depleted, 
it can take significant time to restore its fertility. In some cases it may never recover.  
 
■Figure D4.2.10 Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua)
	
◆Soil erosion: process 
that occurs when the 
impact of water or wind 
detaches and removes soil 
particles, causing the soil 
to deteriorate.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
808
Soil erosion and degradation reduce the quality of soil. This makes the amount of land available per 
person much lower now than in the past, and therefore has a potential impact on food production.
The exposure of soil can also lead to the leaching of nutrients from the soil. When it rains, minerals 
in the soil are washed away and so are not available for plant growth. For example, nitrates are 
essential for the synthesis of amino acids in plants, and thus loss of nitrates leads to a reduction in 
protein synthesis and growth in plants.
Fertilizers are added to soils to increase productivity. For example, nitrates and phosphates can be 
applied, which are used by plants to synthesize amino acids, DNA and other essential biological 
molecules. However, the over-application of fertilizers can lead to eutrophication (see page 808). 
Fertilizers are an example of an agrochemical. Other chemicals used to enhance crop yield are 
pesticides. These kill pests that either eat the crop (for example, insects) or compete with it (for 
example, weeds), reducing crop growth. Targeted pesticides that are biodegradable (i.e. target 
specific pests and can break down naturally) are used to minimize environmental damage. The 
use of non-biodegradable pesticides has a serious and detrimental effect on food chains, leading 
to biomagnification (see page 810), where increased levels of toxins accumulate in the tissues of 
consumers in higher trophic levels.
Another issue to consider is the distance that agricultural crops 
are transported. Transportation uses energy generated from 
fossil fuels, which adds to the amount of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere. This addition of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, 
is leading to global warming (see page 824). Ideally, transport 
should be minimized so that the carbon footprint of the crop 
is reduced. The carbon footprint refers to the amount of carbon 
dioxide (and also methane, – CH4) released into the atmosphere 
as a result of a particular activity. Growing crops locally to 
where they are consumed minimizes their carbon footprint. 
The demand for unseasonal foods (such as strawberries in 
Europe during the winter months) has increased the global 
transport of food, which has increased the carbon footprint of 
food. Consumption of seasonal crops, grown locally, will 
reduce the impact of agriculture on the environment.
Eutrophication of aquatic and marine 
ecosystems due to leaching
Eutrophication is the natural or artificial enrichment of a body of water, particularly with respect 
to nitrates and phosphates. There are both natural and human causes of eutrophication. Natural 
effects include nutrients being added from decomposing biomass and run-off from areas surrounding 
the body of water. Human causes include run-off of fertilizers or manure from agricultural land, 
domestic waste water containing phosphates from detergents, and non-treated sewage. Leaching of 
mineral nutrients from agricultural land into rivers can also cause eutrophication.
The addition of extra nutrients causes algae living in the ion-enriched water to multiply rapidly, 
causing an algal bloom. Raised water temperatures in the summer months add to the algal growth 
rates. The process results in depletion of oxygen levels in the water. Run-off and leaching from 
agriculture can also end up in the sea, where it can cause eutrophication.
 
■Figure D4.2.11 Soil erosion on a farm after heavy rain
2	 List the factors 
that affect the 
sustainability of 
agriculture.
	
◆Leaching: the loss of 
water-soluble nutrients 
from the soil.
	
◆Agrochemical: 
a chemical used in 
agriculture, such as a 
pesticide or a fertilizer.
	
◆Carbon footprint: 
the amount of carbon 
dioxide released into the 
atmosphere because of 
the activities of a particular 
individual, organization 
or community.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
809
l	 the increase in DOM leads to an increase in bacteria that 
feed on the dead biomass, causing it to decompose
l	 bacterial respiration leads to increased BOD (see below), 
which causes a lowered oxygen content of water (hypoxia)
l	 oxygen-dependent organisms, such as fish, die due to a lack 
of oxygen. The fish community can become dominated by 
surface-dwelling coarse fish, such as roach and rudd.
Common mistake
In explanations for anoxic water following eutrophication, the 
involvement of bacteria is often omitted. Bacteria feed on 
dead plants and remove oxygen from the water, causing low 
oxygen conditions. This then leads to the death of animals in 
the ecosystem affected.
 
■Figure D4.2.12 Eutrophication in the 
Ijssel River in the Netherlands
The chain of events leading to eutrophication can be summarized as follows:
l	 as more nutrients are added to the system, through leaching of nutrients from surrounding 
ground, the biomass of algae increases due to the availability of nutrients
l	 the growth of algae gives lower light penetration, causing underwater plants to die and create 
more nutrients as they decompose
l	 more nutrients leads to further growth of algae
l	 the increased death of algae and underwater plants leads to an increase in dead organic 
matter (DOM)
Further effects of eutrophication include: 
l	 net primary productivity is usually higher compared with unpolluted water, and may be 
indicated by extensive algal or bacterial blooms
l	 diversity of primary producers changes and finally decreases; the dominant species change
l	 the length of the food chain decreases as algae lock up the nutrients and block sunlight from 
reaching the riverbed
l	 with less sunlight penetrating the water, macrophytes (submerged aquatic plants) disappear 
because they are unable to photosynthesize
l	 as eutrophication proceeds, early algal blooms give way to cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) – 
these are toxic to wild animals and humans
l	 fish populations are adversely affected by reduced oxygen availability, and the fish community 
becomes dominated by surface-dwelling coarse fish, such as roach and rudd.
 
■Biochemical oxygen demand
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is a measure of the amount of dissolved oxygen required to 
break down the organic material in a given volume of water through aerobic biological activity. BOD 
increases in water that has organic pollution, such as sewage, or that has been nutrient-enriched by 
fertilizers (leading to eutrophication). Aerobic organisms use oxygen in respiration. When there are 
more organisms and faster respiration, more oxygen will be used. Thus, the BOD at any point is 
affected by:
l	 the number of aerobic organisms
l	 their rate of respiration.
BOD is an indirect method used to assess pollution levels in water. The presence of an organic 
pollutant causes an increase in the population of organisms that feed on and break down the 
pollutant, such as bacteria. Organic pollution causes a high BOD. 
3	 Define the term 
eutrophication.
	
◆Biochemical oxygen 
demand (BOD): a 
measure of the amount of 
dissolved oxygen required 
to break down the 
organic material in a given 
volume of water through 
aerobic biological activity. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
810
Both chemical testing and indicator species can be used to test the quality of the water. BOD can be 
measured directly:
1	 Take a sample of water of measured volume.
2	 Measure the oxygen level using an oxygen probe.
3	 Place the sample in a dark place at 20 °C for five days. (Lack of light prevents photosynthesis, 
which would release oxygen and give an artificially low BOD.)
4	 After five days, remeasure the oxygen level.
5	 BOD is the difference between the two measurements.
Concept: Change
Pollution can change the abiotic factors within an ecosystem, which in turn impacts the 
biotic (living) components. These changes have a detrimental effect on the ecosystem.
Biomagnification of pollutants 
in natural ecosystems
The use of non-biodegradable toxins (such as DDT or mercury) can affect food chains, especially 
top predators. Increased concentrations occur because consumers feed on a number of organisms, 
so accumulate the toxins present in all of them. Organisms higher up the food chain live longer and 
so have more time to accumulate the toxin. Top carnivores are therefore at risk from poisoning from 
the toxin.
Wild plants and animals have evolved alongside their predators and parasites, and most live in 
balance with them. In contrast, cultivated crops and herds have been artificially selected to be 
especially productive and high-yielding, but typically have limited resistance to local parasites and 
predators. Crops grown as monocultures are especially prone to local predators. Pesticides are 
chemicals that are used to control harmful organisms which are a danger to crops or herds. 
Pesticides have improved productivity in agriculture enormously, but their use has generated 
problems in the environment.
The revolution in the chemical control of insect pests came when a particular substance, known as 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), was found to be a very effective insecticide (substance used 
to kill insects), causing rapid death even when applied in low concentrations. 
DDT is fat soluble and is selectively retained in the fatty tissues of animals, rather than circulating 
in their blood to be excreted by the kidneys. Bioaccumulation refers to the build-up of non-
biodegradable or slowly biodegradable chemicals in the body. DDT is stored in fat tissues because it 
is not recognized as a toxin and is not excreted.
As a result, at each stage of the food chain, DDT becomes concentrated. The process by which 
chemical substances become concentrated in the tissues of organisms at higher trophic levels is 
called biomagnification – the result can be that a top predator may have an accumulation that 
is several thousand times greater than that of a primary producer. In vertebrates, fish and birds, 
for example, DDT concentrations sometimes reached toxic levels (Figure D4.2.14). It began to be 
concentrated in top carnivores with devastating consequences.
4	 Explain the 
relationship 
between BOD and 
eutrophication.
5	 Explain why 
eutrophication 
reduces the length 
of an aquatic 
food chain.
	
◆Pesticide: chemical 
that is used to control 
organisms that are a 
danger to crops or herds.
	
◆Bioaccumulation: 
the build-up of non-
biodegradable or slowly 
biodegradable chemicals 
in the body. 
	
◆Biomagnification: 
the process by which 
chemical substances 
become concentrated in 
the tissues of organisms 
at higher trophic levels.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
811
a food chain in which
DDT was concentrated
tertiary consumer
(bird)
secondary consumer
(carnivorous ﬁsh)
primary consumer
(herbivorous
invertebrate)
124 ppm DDT
5 ppm DDT
1 ppm DDT
0.0025 ppm DDT
producer
(plankton)
pyramid of biomass of the food chain, showing typical concentrations
of DDT in ppm/organism
run-off from agricultural land carried very
dilute solution of pesticides, e.g. DDT
DDT entered cells
of phytoplankton
carnivorous ﬁsh ate the
herbivores and were in
turn eaten by the top
carnivores
herbivorous
invertebrates ate
phytoplankton and
accumulated DDT
 
■Figure D4.2.13 Biomagnification of DDT
Common mistake
Do not confuse bioaccumulation with biomagnification. Bioaccumulation is the build-up of toxins 
in the biomass (usually lipids) of organisms. Biomagnification is the increasing concentration of the 
toxin per gram of biomass as the chemicals pass along the food chain.
 
■The causes and consequences of biomagnification 
Examine the following figure (Figure D4.2.15). What do the data show you about the causes and consequences 
of biomagnification?
1870
1980
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
year
1.70
1.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
relative eggshell thickness
museum-held samples from
before the use of DDT
DDT in use
sparrowhawk
herbivorous
birds
insectivorous
birds
herbivorous
insects
plant leaves, buds and fruits
 
■Figure D4.2.14 Eggshell thickness studies in sparrowhawks
6	 Distinguish between bioaccumulation and biomagnification.
7	 Analyse the steps by which pesticides, applied at apparently 
safe concentrations, may cause the death of organisms seemingly 
unrelated to the crops or herds for which the pesticides 
are designed.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
812
Figure D4.2.15 shows the food web for a sparrowhawk. When DDT was used as an insecticide, 
it was probable that this pesticide would bioaccumulate at each trophic level in the food chain 
where it was used and biomagnify in the top carnivore. In the eggshell thickness study of British 
sparrowhawks 1870–1980 (Figure D4.2.15) more than 2000 clutches of eggs were measured, each 
dot representing the mean shell thickness of a clutch (typically five eggs).
Although DDT is not a nerve poison in birds and mammals, in breeding birds it does inhibit the 
deposition of calcium in the eggshell. Affected birds lay thin-shelled eggs that crack easily. There 
was a rapid decline in numbers of birds of prey in areas where DDT had become widely used in 
agriculture. When this harmful effect of DDT was discovered, this quality of chemical ‘stability’ 
was renamed ‘persistence’. Once the wider effects of organochlorine pesticides on wildlife were 
recognized, a ban was imposed in economically developed countries.
Effects of microplastic and macroplastic 
pollution of the oceans
Plastics are used in an increasing number of disposable 
consumer products. These plastics are persistent in the natural 
environment due to their non‑biodegradability. Macroplastics 
are large debris that is easily visible, such as bottles, plastic 
bags, rubbish and other material that has not degraded 
(Figure D4.2.16). The physical and chemical breakdown of 
macroplastic into smaller, less-visible microplastic causes its 
own problems. 
Figure D4.2.17 shows how macroplastics enter the marine 
environment, and what happens to them subsequently.
microplastic
macroplastic
chemical pollutant
<5 mm
>5 mm
UV
degradation to
smaller particle
sizes – more
surface area to
absorb POPs
weathering,
biofouling and
sinking
sink of plastic
and chemicals in
sediments (low
bioavailability
for microbes)
plastics absorb and
concentrate 
chemicals dissolved
in seawater
floating plastics
encounter POPs at
contaminant-rich
surface microlayer
interaction at water
surface with algae
food chain transfer
bioaccumulation
of POPs taken up 
with plastic
ingestion of plastic;
leaching of additives
to organisms
chemical additives
leach from plastic;
equilibrate in water
phase
re-suspension of
chemicals via
plastic in sediment
wave action
input via ships
physical processes
chemicals
biota
input via wind
and rivers
 
■Figure D4.2.16 Sources of marine macroplastics and microplastics, and the various abiotic (physical and 
chemical) and biotic processes affecting them in the marine environment. POPs are persistent organic pollutants 
that are resistant to environmental degradation: they can therefore accumulate through food chains
 
■Figure D4.2.15 Plastic garbage 
contamination of the sea and beaches
	
◆Macroplastic: 
relatively large, easily 
visible plastic debris found 
especially in the marine 
environment (typically 
more than 5 mm in size), 
such as bottles, plastic 
bags, rubbish and other 
materials that have not 
degraded.
	
◆Microplastic: 
extremely small pieces of 
plastic debris, less than 
5 mm in size, resulting 
from the breakdown of 
consumer products and 
industrial waste.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.2   Stability and change
813
Macroplastic and microplastic debris has accumulated in marine environments. Macroplastics can 
be confused with food by marine predators. There is evidence that the degradation of marine plastics 
releases non-biodegradable contaminants that can bioaccumulate in the food chain. Once chemicals 
enter food chains, the top predators are often at extra risk because of the biomagnification effects of 
some chemicals. Studies of Southern fur seals have shown that seal scats (faeces) can contain plastic 
particles from the night-feeding myctophids (lanternfish), which are active near the sea surface and 
which are consumed by the seals. 
 
■The impact of marine plastic debris on the Laysan albatross
The Laysan albatross (Phoebastria immutabilis) ranges across the North Pacific, with 99.7% of the 
population breeding on the north-western Hawaiian Islands. They are large birds, with a wingspan 
of about 2 m, and require great quantities of fish to survive. One island on which they nest, Midway 
Atoll, is in the North Pacific gyre, and large volumes of plastic are washed on to its beaches. Many 
birds accidentally eat plastic and other marine debris floating in the ocean, mistaking it for food. 
The problem is made worse by the way in which the Laysan albatrosses catch fish: they catch squid 
and other seafood by skimming the surface of the water with their beak. By catching food in this way 
they also accidentally pick up a lot of floating plastic, which they then feed to their chicks. Chicks, 
unlike adults, cannot regurgitate plastic that they have swallowed, and so the plastic can fill their 
stomachs, potentially leading to starvation. 
 
■The impact of marine plastics on sea turtles
Plastic garbage harms and kills approximately 100 000 sea turtles and other marine animals each 
year. Sea turtles mistake plastic bags for jelly fish (one of their favourite foods) and so eat them – the 
consequences of ingesting plastic can be fatal; if the plastic debris gets lodged in the mouth, the 
turtle can have problems feeding, eventually leading to starvation.
Nature of science: Global impact of science
Scientists can influence the actions of citizens if they provide clear information about their research 
findings. Popular media coverage of the effects of plastic pollution on marine life has changed 
public perception globally, which has driven measures to address this problem. Groups such as 
The Ocean Cleanup (https://theoceancleanup.com) have information about the extent of plastic 
pollution and strategies for reducing it. The following website lists many groups active in 
reducing plastic pollution and raising public awareness of the issues:  
https://innovations-oceans-sans-plastique.com/en/ngo-from-a-z 
8	 Outline how 
micro- and 
macroplastics can 
affect food chains.
Restoration of natural processes 
in ecosystems by rewilding
Chapter A4.2 discusses how different methods could be used to conserve species, habitats and 
ecosystems. One technique is rewilding (see page 176). Rewilding aims to restore ecosystems and 
reverse declines in biodiversity by allowing wildlife and natural processes to reclaim areas no longer 
under human management. Rewilding reintroduces lost animal species to natural environments, such 
as top (apex) predators that have a significant effect on the food web and trophic levels in an ecosystem. 
Keystone species are also reintroduced, which are essential for the functioning of the ecosystem (see 
page 805). The establishment of connectivity of habitats over large areas, using corridors of habitat that 
connect different areas, allows for movement of animals between fragments and gives larger animals the 
area they need to feed and breed. Agriculture and other resource harvesting are no longer allowed and 
natural ecosystems are allowed to recover through ecological management.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
814
The Hinewai Reserve is an ecological restoration project on Banks Peninsula, New Zealand 
(Figure D4.2.18).
 
■Figure D4.2.17 Otanerito Bay from Hinewai Reserve, Banks Peninsula, New Zealand
Parts of the reserve were cleared by human settlers, initially by Polynesian settlers (from about 700 
years ago) and then by European settlers (from around 1850 onwards) who completed the clearance. 
The area covers 1250 hectares and is managed to ensure the natural regeneration of native vegetation 
and wildlife. The ecological management involves minimal intervention, allowing succession to 
occur resulting in ecosystems (nearly all forest) similar to those that existed before forest clearance. 
Alien species are removed, such as exotic trees and vines, allowing the endemic flora and fauna to be 
re-established. 
 ATL D4.2C 
Read more about the Hinewai Reserve in New Zealand here: www.hinewai.org.nz
Biologist Dr Hugh Wilson has been reforesting the Hinewai Reserve since 1987. Read more about 
him and his work here: https://brightvibes.com/2048/en/meet-the-kiwi-whos-spent-over-30-years-
reforesting-a-corner-of-new-zealand 
Produce a poster summarizing how communities and habitats in the reserve are being restored. 
Use your knowledge of stability of ecosystems to include detail of how the continuity of the 
ecosystem can be assured.
Link
The need for several 
approaches to 
conservation of 
biodiversity is covered 
in Chapter A4.2, 
page 174.
Ecological succession and its causes
All ecosystems develop over time from the point of colonization of a pristine area to the maturation 
of a stable final community. Succession is the term for the orderly process of change over time in a 
community. Succession can be triggered by changes in both an abiotic environment and in biotic 
factors. Changes in the community of organisms frequently cause changes in the physical 
environment, allowing another community to become established and eventually replace the former 
through competition. Often, but not inevitably, the later communities in such a sequence (or sere) 
are more complex than those that appear earlier. The first communities are called pioneer 
communities, while the final stage of the succession is the climax community. Two examples of 
succession, from pioneer community to climax community, could be:
l	 Succession in freshwater:
	
aquatic plants (e.g. water lilies) → reeds → low woodland species (e.g. willow)
l	 Succession in an abandoned quarry: 
	
mosses and lichens → grasses and herbs → shrubs (e.g. birch) → woodland
	
◆Succession: the 
orderly process of change 
over time in a community.
	
◆Pioneer community: 
the first stage of an 
ecological succession 
that contains hardy 
species able to withstand 
difficult conditions.
	
◆Climax community: 
a community of 
organisms that is more 
or less stable and in 
equilibrium with natural 
environmental conditions 
such as climate. It 
is the end point of 
ecological succession.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.2   Stability and change
815
Changes occurring during primary succession
 
■Primary succession
The formation of an ecosystem in an environment devoid of vegetation and lacking soil, for example 
bare rock, is called a xerosere (Figure D4.2.19):
l	 pioneer species arrive (for example, lichens, mosses and bacteria)
l	 as pioneers die, soil is created
l	 new species of plants arrive that need soil to survive – these displace pioneer species
l	 growth of plants causes changes in the environment (factors such as light, wind and moisture)
l	 growth of roots enables soil to be retained; nutrients and water in the soil increase
l	 nitrogen-fixing plants arrive, adding nitrates to the soil
l	 soil depth increases further, allowing shrubs and other taller plants to arrive
l	 animal species arrive as species of plant they rely on become established
l	 a climax community is established.
new land
e.g. deposited in
river delta, by a
glacier retreating, by
wind-blown sand or
by cooled volcanic
lava
surface algae,
lichens, moss
small-rooted plants
able to withstand
drought (xeromorphic
features)
herbaceous (non-woody)
plants
e.g. grasses,
annual ‘weed’ plants
small shrubs
e.g. blackberry,
hawthorn
first trees
e.g. birch
woodland trees
e.g. oak, ash
diverted climax
caused by
browsing animals
e.g. rabbits, deer, sheep
grassland
initial conditions
pioneer plants
sequences of plant communities of plants of increasing size
climax community
A xerosere = succession under dry, exposed conditions where water
supply is an abiotic factor limiting growth of plants, at least initially.
This succession sequence is not a rigid ecological process, but an example of what may happen. It is influenced by factors such as:
:
a  how quickly humus builds up and soil forms
b rainfall or drought, and the natural drainage that occurs
c invasions of the habitat by animals and seeds of plants.
mineral fragments
and plant debris
collect in cracks,
forming first soil
algae, cyanobacteria
and simple rooted plants
colonize, speeding the
breakdown of rock
rock eroded at
cracks and fault
lines by extreme
of temperature
lichens survive
exposure
soil formation
sequence
on rock
 
■Figure D4.2.18 A primary succession on dry land – a xerosere
Concept: 
Change
Succession is the 
orderly process of 
change over time 
in a community. 
Succession can 
be triggered by 
changes in both an 
abiotic environment 
and in biotic factors.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
816
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Processing data; interpreting results
The table below shows a study of the vegetation of a 
system of developing sand dunes. Note how both the 
species diversity and physical parameters change as 
the dunes age. Analyse the data, then process the data 
through the following questions.
Calculate the Simpson’s reciprocal diversity indices 
(see Chapter A4.2, page 157) of the fore dune and 
semi-fixed dune (using a spreadsheet). Comment on 
the results.
State which species are pioneers and which form the 
climax community.
 
■Figure D4.2.19 Sand dune community development – a student field study exercise
Study of a sand dune succession from embryo state to fixed dune
Site 1
Site 2
Site 3
Site 4
Stage in succession
Embryo dune
Fore dune
Semi-fixed dune
Fixed dune
Number of pins dropped
220
220
220
220
sea couch grass
169
9
0
0
marram grass
1
123
19
0
fescue grass
0
0
126
182
spear-leaved orache
4
0
0
0
prickly saltwort
2
0
0
0
bindweed
1
44
0
0
bird's foot trefoil
0
0
6
biting stonecrop
0
0
0
1
buttercup
0
0
0
1
cat's ear
0
0
5
2
clover
0
0
0
68
common stork's bill
0
0
0
11
daisy
0
0
2
8
dandelion (common)
0
0
5
1
eyebright
0
0
0
4
hawkbit
0
0
20
1
ladies bedstraw
0
0
86
35
medick
0
0
0
62
mouse-ear chickweed
0
0
0
2
ragwort
0
0
8
1
restharrow
0
0
25
15
ribwort plantain
0
0
0
37
sand sedge
0
0
32
17
stagshorn plantain
0
0
0
36
tufted moss
0
0
0
119
yellow clover
0
0
0
5
Yorkshire fog
0
0
2
0
wild thyme
0
0
0
82
Total live hits
177
176
330
706
Bare ground hits 
48
68
6
0
% bare ground
27
38
3
0
soil moisture (%)
5.0
8.5
16.0
14.3
soil density (g cm–3)
1.6
0.9
0.6
0.5
soil pH
8.0
7.5
7.0
7.0
wind speed (m s–1)
10.0
9.3
2.4
1.3


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.2   Stability and change
817
 
■Changes in energy, matter and complexity
Both energy and matter change through a succession. Productivity changes through a succession in 
the following way:
l	 In pioneer communities, gross productivity is low due to the initial conditions and the low 
density of producers. The proportion of energy lost through community respiration is also 
relatively low. Net primary productivity (NPP) is therefore high: the system grows and 
biomass accumulates. 
l	 Gross primary productivity increases due to the increase in biomass of the community. 
Sunlight is available for all plants as there is little shading.
l	 In later stages there is an increased consumer community, with increased levels of respiration, 
leading to a reduction in NPP. The rate of accumulation of biomass begins to slow. In climax 
communities gross productivity may be high, but this is balanced by community respiration and 
so overall NPP may be lower than earlier in the succession.
The size of plants increases through a succession, and the complexity of food webs also increases. 
Nutrients initially come from outside the succession in the pioneer stages, but through the 
succession, with increases in biomass, soil depth and complexity, nutrient cycling within the 
ecosystem becomes increasingly important. With increased complexity of the ecosystem during 
the succession, there are increased opportunities for a variety of different niches and so species 
diversity increases. 
Nutrient availability changes from poor initial stores through to gradual accumulation of nutrients as 
biomass develops and soil fertility increases.
Going further
A secondary succession occurs in an environment after an ecosystem has been 
disrupted or destroyed due to a disturbance that reduces the population of the original 
inhabitants. Soil already exists in this type of succession. Recolonization of woodland 
after fire is an example of secondary succession.
Cyclical succession in ecosystems
In some ecosystems there is a cycle of communities rather than a single, unchanging climax 
community. For example, wood pasture cycles from pasture to scrub to woodland and back 
to pasture. 
Wood pasture may be defined as tree-land on which farm animals or deer are systematically grazed. 
Wood pastures were formed and maintained initially by large wild herbivores, although following 
the extinction of many large mammalian species, livestock and deer are the grazers that maintain 
this ecosystem. The grazing regimes of wood pasture systems prevent the mass regeneration of trees, 
and the reduced competition for light allows sufficient tree regeneration for replacement of the tree 
population over time. Grazing prevents mass regeneration that would develop into high forest. 
Wood pastures are mosaic habitats valued for their trees, especially veteran and ancient trees, and 
the plants and animals that they support. Grazing animals (either domestic livestock or deer) are 
fundamental to the existence of this ecosystem along with flowers providing nectar sources and open 
grassland or heathland ground vegetation.
Link
Net primary 
productivity and gross 
primary productivity 
are defined and 
discussed in Chapter 
C4.2, page 592.
Common 
mistake
It is not enough to 
say that ‘productivity 
increases through 
a succession’. 
GPP increases but 
NPP decreases as 
community respiration 
increases.
9	 Distinguish 
between pioneer 
and climax 
communities in a 
succession.
10	Explain the 
interrelationship 
between abiotic 
and biotic 
factors during a 
succession.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
818
Nature of science: Science as a shared endeavour
 
■Figure D4.2.20 Old oak trees on a wood 
pasture in southern Transylvania, Romania
Wood pastures are being studied in the 
Transylvania region of Romania, as well as in 
adjacent areas in other parts of Europe, such 
as Germany. This region contains the highest 
number of wood pastures from central and 
eastern Europe as well as from Romania. This 
example of international cooperation is giving 
scientists a better understanding of wood 
pastures, and how they can best be managed 
and conserved.
Read more about this project here:  
https://transylvanian-wood-pastures.eu/en
Climax communities and arrested succession
Given any specific environmental conditions, ecological succession tends to lead to a particular type 
of climax community. However, human influences can prevent this from developing. 
Climatic and edaphic (soil) factors determine the nature of a climax community. Climax 
communities are more stable than earlier seral stages because: 
l	 they contain more complex food webs – this provides more stability because, if one organism 
becomes extinct, it can be replaced by another
l	 negative feedback mechanisms lead to steady-state equilibrium
l	 each stage in the succession helps to create a deeper and more nutrient-rich soil, so allowing 
larger plants to grow
l	 a climax community is more productive, providing more energy to support consumers 
and decomposers
l	 increased biomass leads to an increased number of niches, which increases species and genetic 
diversity, resulting in greater stability.
Disturbance can stop the process of succession so that the climax community is not reached. 
Interrupted succession is known as arrested succession or plagioclimax. Human activity can have 
various effects on climax communities:
l	 decrease in productivity through the removal of primary producers
l	 reduction in producers, leading to reduced habitat diversity and fewer niches, which threatens 
more specialized species
l	 deterioration in abiotic factors, leading to harsher conditions that fewer species can adapt to
l	 species extinction, leading to shorter food webs
l	 a less complex community, leading to decreased stability.
These activities divert the progression of succession to an alternative stable state so that the original 
climax community is not reached.
	
◆Arrested succession 
(plagioclimax): an area 
where human activity has 
prevented the ecosystem 
developing a climax 
community.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.2   Stability and change
819
 
■Arrested succession: grazing by 
farm livestock
Large parts of the UK were once covered by deciduous 
woodland. Some heather would have been present in the 
north, but relatively little. From 1300–1500 (the Middle Ages) 
and onwards, forests were cleared to supply timber for fuel, 
housing, construction of ships (especially oak) and to clear 
land for agriculture. As a result, soil deteriorated and heather 
came to dominate the plant community. Sheep grazing and 
associated burning has prevented the regrowth of woodland by 
destroying young saplings (Figure D4.2.22).
Controlled burning of heather also prevents the re-
establishment of deciduous woodland. The heather is burned 
after 15 years, before it becomes mature. If the heather 
matured, it would allow colonization of the area by other 
plants. The ash adds to the soil fertility and the new heather 
growth that results increases the productivity of the ecosystem.
 
■Figure D4.2.22 Drainage network establishment for peat 
extraction field, next to the natural peat bog wetland
 
■Figure D4.2.21 Interrupting a succession: grazing prevents a 
climax community from forming and maintains heather moorland
 
■Arrested succession: drainage of wetlands
Drainage of wetlands is another example of arrested succession. Wetlands include a variety of 
different ecosystems and are found across the world, including deltas and estuaries, mudflats, 
floodplains and peat bogs. Humans and wildlife have relied on wetlands for thousands of years. 
According to the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust (WWT), approximately 87% of the world’s wetlands 
were lost in the last 300 years, as hundreds of thousands of hectares of wetlands were drained to 
provide land for housing and industry. 
In many areas, soils that formed as wetlands have been drained for agricultural use, such as the 
drainage of more than 1 million acres in South Florida for agriculture (sugarcane, vegetables and 
other crops). In other areas, wetlands are drained so that peat can be extracted (Figure D4.2.23).
Top tip!
Various factors can divert the progression of succession to an alternative stable state by modifying 
the ecosystem, such as the use of fire in an ecosystem, agriculture, grazing pressure or resource 
use (such as deforestation). This diversion may be more or less permanent depending upon the 
resilience of the ecosystem.
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What is the distinction between artificial and natural processes?
2	 Over what timescales do things change in different biological systems?
