Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
820
D4.3
Climate change
•	 What are the drivers of climate change?
•	 What are the impacts of climate change on ecosystems?
Guiding questions
SYLLABUS CONTENT
This chapter covers the following syllabus content:
	 D4.3.1 	 Anthropogenic causes of climate change
	 D4.3.2 	 Positive feedback cycles in global warming
	 D4.3.3 	 Change from net carbon accumulation to net loss in boreal forests as an 
example of a tipping point
	 D4.3.4 	 Melting of landfast ice and sea ice as examples of polar habitat change
	 D4.3.5 	 Changes in ocean currents altering the timing and extent of nutrient upwelling
	 D4.3.6 	 Poleward and upslope range shifts of temperate species
	 D4.3.7 	 Threats to coral reefs as an example of potential ecosystem collapse
	 D4.3.8 	 Afforestation, forest regeneration and restoration of peat-forming wetlands as 
approaches to carbon sequestration
	 D4.3.9 	 Phenology as research into the timing of biological events (HL only)
	 D4.3.10 	Disruption to the synchrony of phenological events by climate change (HL only)
	 D4.3.11 	Increases to the number of insect life cycles within a year due to climate change 
(HL only)
	 D4.3.12 	Evolution as a consequence of climate change (HL only)
Anthropogenic causes of climate change
Climate is the long-term average of the weather, over 20–30 years, not year-to-year variations. 
Climate change is a long-term change in global or regional climate patterns, caused by natural or 
human factors. Climate change since the mid- to late-twentieth century onwards is attributed 
primarily to the increased levels of atmospheric greenhouse gases produced by the use of fossil fuels 
and land-use change (the latter, i.e. deforestation and cattle, account for almost 40% of historic 
change). To understand the causes of climate change, we first need to understand the 
greenhouse effect. 
 
■The greenhouse effect
The radiant energy reaching the Earth from the Sun is mainly visible light with some ultraviolet and 
shorter-wavelength infrared radiation (together termed shortwave radiation). It is this shortwave 
radiation that is largely transmitted through the atmosphere to directly warm up the sea and the 
land, although some is reflected by clouds before it reaches the surface. As the surface warms, the 
Earth itself radiates more infrared radiation at longer wavelengths back towards space. However, 
much of this heat does not escape from our atmosphere. This radiation is absorbed by clouds and by 
gases in the atmosphere, which are warmed. In this respect, the atmosphere traps heat somewhat 
like a greenhouse, which is why this phenomenon is called the greenhouse effect (Figure D4.3.1). 
	
◆Climate: a long-term 
average of the weather, 
over 20–30 years.
	
◆Climate change: 
a long-term change in 
global or regional climate 
patterns, caused by 
natural or human factors, 
such as increased levels 
of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide produced by the 
use of fossil fuels.
	
◆Greenhouse effect: 
the heating caused 
by the atmosphere on 
Earth’s surface because 
certain atmospheric gases 
absorb and emit infrared 
radiation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
821
The atmosphere lets through much of the sunlight but absorbs much of the outgoing infrared 
radiation. We must recognize that the greenhouse effect is very important to life on the Earth – 
without it, surface temperatures would be altogether too cold for life (see Chapter A2.1 (HL only), 
page 34). 
Sun
atmosphere
reﬂected back
to space
infrared radiation
emitted by Earth’s surface
some infrared radiation is
absorbed by greenhouse
gases and re-emitted in all
directions by the atmosphere
some infrared radiation passes
through atmosphere into space
Earth
surface warmed
surface warmed
atmosphere heated
– raising Earth’s
temperature
incoming solar
radiation (of
ultraviolet,
visible light
and infrared)
 
■Figure D4.3.1 The greenhouse effect
The gases in the atmosphere that absorb infrared radiation are referred to as greenhouse gases. 
Carbon dioxide and water vapour are the most significant greenhouse gases. Other gases, including 
methane and nitrogen oxides, have less impact. 
The contribution of each gas to the greenhouse effect is largely a product of the properties of the 
gas and of how abundant it is at any time. For example, methane is considerably more powerful 
as a greenhouse gas than the same mass of carbon dioxide. However, methane is present in lower 
concentrations than carbon dioxide. Also, it is a relatively short-lived component of the atmosphere 
– when exposed to (sun)light, methane molecules are steadily oxidized to carbon dioxide and water. 
Table D4.3.1 lists figures for the typical contributions of the chief greenhouse gases.
 
■Table D4.3.1 The direct consequence of greenhouse gases to the greenhouse effect
Compound
Approximate contribution to greenhouse effect / %
water vapour (+ clouds)
36–72
carbon dioxide
9–26
methane + nitrous oxide 
4–9
The long-term records of changing levels of greenhouse gases (and associated climate change) are 
based on evidence obtained from ice cores drilled in the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets. The ice 
there has formed from accumulation of layer upon layer of frozen snow, deposited and compacted 
over thousands of years. Gases from the surrounding atmosphere were trapped as the layers built 
up. Data on the composition of the bubbles of gas obtained from different layers of these cores 
from the Vostok (East Antarctic) Ice Sheet provide a record of how the carbon dioxide and methane 
concentrations have varied over a period of 400 000 years of Earth’s history. Similarly, variations in 
the concentration of oxygen isotopes from the same source indicate how temperature has changed 
during the same period (Figure D4.3.2).
	
◆Greenhouse gas: a 
gas that contributes to 
the greenhouse effect 
by absorbing infrared 
radiation.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
822
temperature relative to present climate/°C
thousands of years before present
4
0
–4
–8
400
300
1 There is a decline in both temperature
   and greenhouse gas concentrations 
   during glacial periods …
2 … and a rapid rise during deglaciation.
3 Climate has been relatively warm and  
   stable during the last 10 000 years 
   – the Holocene interglacial period.
200
100
0
relative carbon dioxide and
methane concentrations
low
high
Key
temperature
CO2
methane
 
■Figure D4.3.2 Three types of data recovered from the Vostok 
ice cores over 400 000 years of Earth history
1	 Using data from Figure D4.3.3, estimate the length of interglacials (warm periods) and 
their frequency.
I
I
I
I
I
G
I = interglacial  (warm period)   
G = glacial (cold period)
G
G
G
Present day (2021)
= 414.72
carbon dioxide
concentration (ppm)
thousands of years before present
0
100
200
300
400
200
250
300
350
400
450
 
■Figure D4.3.3 Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations measured 
from Vostok ice cores and recent Mauna Loa data
2	 Explain why the current concentration of carbon dioxide is different from those of 
previous warm periods.
Nature of science: Patterns and trends
From the graphs in Figures D4.3.2 and D4.3.3, we can see 
that the levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide have varied 
quite markedly. Note that many millions of years ago, 
there were periods in Earth’s history when it was especially 
raised. However, Earth was a very different place then, with 
continental drift, volcanic emissions and weathering of chalk 
and limestone playing a role over very long timescales. Despite 
variation, data from Antarctic ice cores show a positive 
correlation between global temperatures and atmospheric 
carbon dioxide concentrations over hundreds of thousands 
of years (Figure D4.3.2). However, this correlation does not 
prove that carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases global 
temperatures, i.e., it is a causal link. The large changes in 
temperature over glacial cycles are initiated by predictable 
changes in the Earth’s orbit around the Sun (Croll-Milankovitch 
Cycles). Resultant changes in ice cover and greenhouse gases, 
that respond to the temperature swings, amplify the changes 
in climate over this period. However, current carbon dioxide 
concentrations are well above the natural variability in the 
last 800 000 years, and other evidence shows that these 
changes are caused by human activities that are driving current 
climate change.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
823
In June 2022, carbon dioxide was present in the atmosphere at a concentration varying between 
413 and 422 parts per million (ppm) (see Figure C4.2.19, page 600). We might expect the amount of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide to be maintained by a balance between the fixation of this gas during 
photosynthesis and release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere by respiration, combustion and 
decay by micro-organisms – an interrelationship illustrated in the carbon cycle (Figure C4.2.16, 
page 595). In fact, photosynthesis does withdraw almost as much carbon dioxide during daylight 
hours as is released into the air by all the other processes (including human-caused factors), day and 
night – but not quite as much. As a result, the level of atmospheric carbon dioxide is now rising 
(Figure D4.3.3) as shown by the Keeling curve (a daily measure of global atmospheric carbon dioxide 
concentration) in Figure C4.2.18, page 599.
TOK
The discussions around climate change have become quite political and might, for some, seem 
an odd inclusion in a biology textbook. However, just because a topic is political does not mean 
that it is beyond the scope of science. Political claims about the world must be consistent with 
how the world actually is, which is best determined through the methods developed by the 
scientific community over hundreds of years. Scientific findings that are politically inconvenient do 
not necessary mean they are untrue. Furthermore, just because there might be disagreement at 
the political level over certain claims about climate change does not mean that there is genuine 
disagreement within the scientific community about those claims.
Tool 2: Technology 
Generating data from models and simulations
How can models be used to predict future climate 
change? Access the following site:  
https://scied.ucar.edu/interactive/simple-climate-model
The model explores how the rate of carbon dioxide 
emissions affects the amount of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere and, consequently, the Earth’s temperature.
Select an emissions rate for carbon dioxide using the 
sliding scale. Press ‘play’ – the simulation will show 
increases in carbon dioxide and temperature linked to 
the emission rate you have selected. The graph also 
shows the carbon emissions – these will level off at the 
rate you have set.
Repeat the exercise at a range of different emissions 
rates. Plot a graph of emissions rate against 
temperature increase between the current date and 
2100. In 2021, global energy-related carbon dioxide 
emissions were 31.5 Gt according to the International 
Energy Agency’s 2021 Global Energy Review. 
Extrapolate, using your graph, to estimate the increase 
in temperature if this rate of emissions is maintained.
 ATL D4.3A 
A novel way of showing increasing global temperatures 
was developed by Professor Ed Hawkins at the University of 
Reading in 2018. Read about his initiative here:  
www.reading.ac.uk/planet/climate-resources/climate-stripes
The graphic does not use words, graphs or numbers, just 
a series of vertical, coloured bars. What is the advantage 
of this approach compared to more traditional methods of 
showing data?
Create a presentation or display for your school or college 
using the climate stripes. Perhaps you could create a mural 
using the climate stripes as a theme, using recycled waste 
material? Put your display in a prominent area that is 
commonly used in the school, to raise awareness about the 
issue of climate change.
Top tip!
The greenhouse 
effect is a natural 
phenomenon but 
there has been an 
anthropogenic increase 
in carbon dioxide 
concentrations that is 
positively correlated 
with global warming. 
Most climate scientists 
accept that there is a 
causal link between 
increased greenhouse 
gas emissions due to 
human activities and 
climate change.
Link
Analysis of the 
Keeling curve is 
covered in Chapter 
C4.2, page 599. 


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
824
 
■An enhanced greenhouse effect resulting in global warming
The increase in greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane have anthropogenic causes 
(i.e. are caused by humans) and has resulted in an enhanced greenhouse effect. This has resulted in 
the global temperature increasing – a process known as global warming.
Carbon dioxide
The enhanced greenhouse effect is due to the build-up of certain greenhouse gases because of 
human activity. Carbon dioxide levels have risen from about 315 ppm in 1950 to approximately 
418 ppm in 2022, and could reach 600 ppm by 2050 depending on policy decisions by governments. 
The increase is due to human activities, particularly the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural 
gas), deforestation and agricultural emissions. 
Since the advent of industrial revolutions (the past 200 years or so), there has been a sharp and 
accelerating rise in the level of this greenhouse gas. This is mainly attributed to the burning of coal 
and oil; these ‘fossil fuels’ were mostly laid down in the Carboniferous Period. As a result, we are 
now adding to our atmosphere carbon that had been locked away for about 350 million years. This is 
an entirely new development in geological history. 
Deforestation of the tropical rainforests has a double impact – not only does it increase atmospheric 
carbon dioxide levels, it also removes the trees that convert carbon dioxide into glucose, producing 
oxygen as a by-product. Deforestation accounts for about 12–15% of global carbon dioxide 
emissions, with emissions coming from the burning of trees. The resulting graph of increasing 
carbon dioxide concentrations (see Figure D4.3.3 and Figure C4.2.18, page 599) is a key piece of 
evidence for anthropogenic changes to the global carbon budget.
 
■Table D4.3.2 Changing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide – recorded and predicted
Time period
CO2 levels/ppm
pre-Industrial Revolution level (before 1850)
280 (± 10)
by mid 1970s
330
by 1990
360
by 2007
380
by 2013
400
by 2050 (if current rate of anthropogenic emission is maintained)
600
 ATL D4.3B 
Will higher carbon dioxide levels boost plant productivity? If so, what impact will this have on 
ecosystems and the atmosphere? 
https://allianceforscience.cornell.edu/blog/2018/04/will-rising-carbon-dioxide-levels-really-boost-
plant-growth
Discuss the issues with members of your class. The outcomes may be more complex than first 
appear and depend on the type of photosynthesis carried out by plants (see Going further).
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Going further
Plants can be categorized based on the way they photosynthesize. Most plants are 
C3 plants because their first photosynthetic product is a three-carbon compound. 
Examples of C3 plants include barley, oats, potato, rice and wheat, which are 
commonly grown in temperate regions. On the other hand, C4 plants produce a four-
carbon compound as their first photosynthetic product. Examples of C4 plants are 
common grass crops of tropical regions, such as maize, millet, sorghum and sugarcane.
	
◆Global warming: 
an increase in the global 
average temperature of 
the Earth’s surface and 
atmosphere.
Concept: 
Change
Human activities 
are increasing the 
greenhouse gases 
in the atmosphere, 
such as carbon 
dioxide and 
methane. This has 
led to the enhanced 
greenhouse effect 
and climate change.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
825
Methane
Methane (CH4) is the second-largest contributor to global warming and is increasing at a rate of 
between 0.5 and 2% per annum. Cattle alone release between 65 and 85 million tonnes of methane 
per year. Natural wetlands and paddy fields are another important source – paddy fields emit up to 
150 million tonnes of methane annually. As global warming increases, bogs trapped in permafrost 
will thaw and could release vast quantities of methane (see pages 596 and 828).
Common mistake
The greenhouse effect and global warming are often considered to be the same. They are not, but 
they are related. The greenhouse effect is a natural process that traps some outgoing longwave 
(infrared) radiation and enables life on Earth. The enhanced greenhouse effect is the process in 
which human activities have led to an increase in the amount of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere, and an increased trapping of infrared radiation by these greenhouse gases, leading to 
an increase in global surface temperatures, i.e. global warming. 
3	 Distinguish 
between the 
greenhouse effect 
and the enhanced 
greenhouse effect.
Positive feedback cycles in global warming
There are many examples of feedback in the process of global warming. Positive feedback 
mechanisms involve, for example, increasing temperatures, thawing permafrost and the release of 
methane. As methane is a greenhouse gas, it has the potential to increase temperatures, thereby 
reinforcing the rise in temperature.
 
■Methane feedback
Around one-quarter of the Earth’s surface is affected by continuous or sporadic permafrost, including 
tundra, polar and mountain regions. Globally, permafrost covers 23 million square kilometres 
(mostly in the Earth’s northern hemisphere). It formed during past cold glacial periods and has 
persisted through warmer interglacial periods, including the Holocene (the last 10 000 years).
Reports indicate that methane-storing permafrost is now shrinking at an alarming rate. According 
to scientists at NASA, temperatures in Newtok, Alaska, have risen by 4 °C since the 1960s, and by 
as much as 10 °C in winter months. The effects of permafrost thawing are potentially magnified over 
time by positive feedback loops.
1	 As the atmosphere warms, more permafrost is expected to thaw.
2	 This will release large amounts of methane (some researchers estimate that the volume of 
this gas stored in permafrost equates to more than double the amount of carbon currently in 
the atmosphere).
3	 The atmosphere will warm up even more quickly.
4	 This will cause (i.e. feedback) even more methane to be released by more melting permafrost.
Climate-related drying of wetlands would increase emissions of methane and carbon dioxide in 
peatlands that have been deposited over millions of years and would increase the potential for peat 
fires, which are difficult to extinguish.
Research has shown that increased mean global temperatures increases the rate of decomposition. 
If humidity remains stable, an increase of the atmospheric temperature of 1 °C leads to an increase in 
the rate of decomposition of up to 10%, according to a 2019 paper on the effects of climate change 
on decomposition process in the Andean Paramo ecosystem. In terms of peat, decomposition 
rates increase, which leads to increased production of methane and carbon dioxide, which in turn 
increases the global temperature – another example of positive feedback.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
826
 
■Terrestrial and marine carbon feedback
Figure D4.3.4 shows another positive feedback model. Here, combined terrestrial and marine 
feedback loops are shown which both result from, and accelerate further, global temperature rises. 
The elements of this model include:
l	 increasing water vapour in the atmosphere; because water vapour is also a greenhouse gas, this 
could lead to further temperature rises
l	 terrestrial permafrost thawing and methane release
l	 a reduction in seawater’s ability to absorb surplus carbon dioxide from the atmosphere: warmer 
water is less effective at absorbing carbon dioxide than colder water, and so may begin to release, 
rather than absorb, carbon dioxide from deep ocean waters if temperatures continue to rise. 
However, life in the oceans absorbs more carbon dioxide and so the overall outcome is not 
so clear.
Global
temperature rise
Increased oceanic
temperatures
More CO2, water vapour,
clouds and CH4 in
the atmosphere
Start: More CO2 from
human activity
acts as a greenhouse gas
Warming tundra
 emits CO2 
and CH4
Water evaporates
from the ocean
surface
Dissolved CO2
released by
warmer oceans
Warms the
oceans
More energy
for evaporation
Water goes
back into
atmosphere
More
greenhouse
gases
Warm water
less able to
dissolve CO2
CO2 back
into atmosphere
CO2 and CH4 
back into
atmosphere
Warms the
tundra
 
■Figure D4.3.4 A system diagram showing how interrelations between climate 
change, water flows and carbon flows could create positive feedback loops
Carbon dioxide dissolved in the surface of the ocean can be transferred to the deep ocean in 
areas where cold, dense surface waters sink. This down-welling carries carbon molecules to great 
depths where they may remain for centuries. Carbon is also carried to the floor of the ocean in the 
bodies of small organisms. Ocean phytoplankton absorb carbon dioxide through photosynthesis. 
These organisms form the bottom of the marine food web, and they live in the oceans’ surface layer 
where sunlight penetrates. Phytoplankton are consumed by other marine organisms and carbon 
is subsequently transferred along food chains by fish and larger sea animals as they consume one 
another. Organic carbon may eventually be transferred to the deep ocean when dead organisms 
sink towards the ocean floor. Increasing temperatures in the deep ocean releases carbon dioxide 
through decreased solubility of carbon dioxide and increased decomposition of dead organisms on 
the ocean floor.
Increased temperature through global warming melts more of the ice in polar ice caps, glaciers and 
sea ice (Figures D4.3.5 and D4.3.6), leading to a decrease in the Earth’s reflectivity (albedo). 
Thus the Earth absorbs more of the Sun’s energy, which makes the temperature increase even more, 
melting more ice.
	
◆Albedo: the fraction 
of solar radiation reflected 
by a surface or object, 
often expressed as a 
percentage.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
827
 
■Figure D4.3.5 Arctic ice melting, leading to positive feedback through decreased planetary albedo
Increased
temperature
in polar areas
Less ice
Increased amount
of solar energy
absorbed at the
Earth’s surface
Increased
melting of
polar ice caps 
Increase in
temperature
Lower albedo
(reflectivity) 
 
■Figure D4.3.6 Positive feedback in global warming
 
■Droughts and forest fires
A further example of positive feedback linked to climate change is the increased incidence of 
droughts and forest fires. With increased global temperatures, there is greater chance that droughts 
will occur and, subsequently, increase the chance of fire. Combustion of vegetation releases carbon 
dioxide into the atmosphere, which increases global warming still further. High temperatures, 
drought and high winds in Europe in the summer of 2022 made fighting the higher numbers of 
wildfires in France, Portugal, Spain and Greece difficult. These fires released large quantities of 
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and removed important carbon sinks. 
Change from net carbon accumulation 
to net loss in boreal forests as an 
example of a tipping point
Boreal (coniferous) forests (also known as taiga) store more carbon than tropical rainforests globally 
because they are distributed across a greater area, including much of northern Russia and North 
America. In boreal forests and wetlands, frozen soils contain large reserves of carbon (in the form of 
carbon compounds).
Common 
mistake
The word ‘positive’ 
usually means 
something that is good 
or useful. In terms of 
feedback, the word 
‘positive’ does not 
mean that the feedback 
loop has a constructive 
effect on the 
environment. Positive 
feedback increases 
change in a system, 
moving it further away 
from steady-state 
equilibrium.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
828
The Siberia Integrated Regional Study (SIRS) aims to investigate environmental change in Siberia 
(Figure D4.3.7) due to current global changes, and the potential impact on Earth system dynamics. 
The actual and projected consequences of global warming are well documented for Siberia. 
Temperatures have already increased, particularly during the winter in Eastern Siberia (0.5 °C per 
decade), and the number of frost days and growing season length have also increased (roughly one 
day per year). Decreased winter snowfall has led to increased incidence of drought and reductions 
in primary production in taiga. Future climate change threats include the shift of permafrost 
boundaries northward, and dramatic changes in land cover. 
According to SIRS, there are three main regional challenges that are very important for the global 
carbon cycle:
l	 Permafrost degradation, especially its border shift, might form a significant carbon and methane 
source to the atmosphere (while also seriously threatening human infrastructure). Climate-related 
drying would alter methane emissions in peatlands that have been deposited over millennia and 
would increase the potential for peat fires that cannot be extinguished.
l	 Temperature and precipitation changes, which increase forest browning and cause increases 
in the frequency and intensity of forest fires, thus significantly changing the carbon cycle of 
the region.
l	 Shifts in ecosystem borders northwards. The taiga zones (currently two-thirds of Siberia) will 
move northward and be reduced to 40% of the present area (Figure D4.3.7).
Key   
0  Water 
1  Tundra 
2  Forest-tundra 
3  Dark-leaf taiga 
4  Light-leaf taiga 
5  Forest-steppe 
6  Steppe 
7  Semi-desert 
8  Polar desert
a
Key   
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Key   
b
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 
■Figure D4.3.7 Vegetation over Siberia: a) 2009, and b) predicted for 2090
The southern borderline of taiga in Siberia will be more affected by forest fires. In this region, 
conditions favourable to fire have become unusually frequent during the past 20 years. Fire and the 
thawing of permafrost are considered to be the principal mechanisms that will trigger vegetation 
changes across the Siberian landscape and lead to increased release of carbon into the atmosphere in 
the form of carbon dioxide.
4	 Outline how 
positive feedback 
mechanisms result 
in climate change.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
829
Melting of landfast ice and sea ice 
as examples of polar habitat change
The Arctic is a highly sensitive region – ice cover varies naturally according 
to the season. However, since 1979, the decline in the September Arctic sea 
ice is 12.6% per decade according to NASA, compared to its average extent 
during the period of 1981 to 2010. At this rate, there may be no ice by 
the summer of 2060. The associated Greenland ice is similarly in decline. 
Loss of sea ice has impacts for animals that use the ice to feed and breed. 
For example, the loss of sea ice habitat has affected walruses (Odobenus 
rosmarus) in the Arctic. Walruses cannot swim continuously so use sea 
ice as a place for rest between dives to the sea floor where they feed on 
clams and mussels. Sea ice floes are especially important for walrus calves 
(Figure D4.3.8).
In Antarctica the picture is more complex. According to NASA, Antarctica is losing approximately 
150 billion tonnes of ice mass a year due to melting. Also, major sections of the Antarctic ice shelf 
have broken off. Meanwhile, at times, the interior ice has become cooler and thicker, as circular 
winds around the land mass have prevented warmer air reaching the interior. Warmer seas may be 
eroding the ice from underneath, but the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
predicts that the Antarctic’s contribution to rising sea levels will be small. 
Landfast ice is sea ice that is ‘fastened’ to the coastline, to the sea floor along shoals or to grounded 
icebergs. As temperatures increase, these areas of sea ice break away from their attachment 
(‘breakout’). As the planet warms through global warming, breakout of landfast ice is happening 
earlier in the year. Early breakout of landfast ice in the Antarctic has implications for animals that live 
and breed in these regions, such as the emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) – the largest penguin 
on Earth. These penguins use landfast ice, such as that in the Weddell Sea, to live and breed, and so 
early melting of the sea ice leads to loss of their breeding grounds. This could severely impact on the 
species’ ongoing survival.
Changes in ocean currents
On a global scale, the oceanic conveyor belt (Figure D.4.3.9) transfers energy around, and links, 
the world’s great oceans. Waters that flow from the Equator are generally warm, whereas those that 
flow from the high latitudes are cold. At the Earth’s poles, cold, salty water sinks and is replaced by 
surface water that is warmed in the tropics. Now, with increasing temperatures at the poles, more 
melting ice decreases ocean salinity, which then slows the great ocean currents. Ocean currents 
convey heat energy from warmer to colder regions through their pattern of convection. Thus, for 
example, as the Gulf Stream (which, to date, has kept temperatures in Europe relatively warmer 
than in Canada) slows down, more heat is retained in the Gulf of Mexico. Here, hurricanes get their 
energy from warmer water, and they are becoming more frequent and more severe. 
Upwelling is a process where deep, cold water rises toward the surface and it occurs in the north 
Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean (Figure D.4.3.9). Upwelling draws nutrients from the deep 
ocean to the surface, causing an increase in phytoplankton abundance, which in turn leads to an 
increase in zooplankton. Some marine animals, such as whales, migrate to these areas of high 
primary production. If climate change affects the oceanic conveyor belt, and the ocean primary 
production decreases in these areas, there will be a knock-on effect for marine food chains. 
	
◆Landfast ice: sea 
ice that is `fastened' 
(attached) to the 
coastline, to the sea 
floor along shoals or to 
grounded icebergs.
	
◆Upwelling: process 
where deep, cold water 
rises toward the surface 
of the ocean.
 
■Figure D4.3.8 Adult female Atlantic walrus 
(Odobenus rosmarus) and juvenile resting on 
pack ice, Svalbard Archipelago, Arctic Norway


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
830
The changes in ocean currents affect the availability of nutrients in the ocean. Warmer surface water 
can prevent nutrient upwelling to the surface, which decreases ocean primary production and energy 
flow through marine food chains. 
 
■Figure D4.3.9 The Earth’s ocean currents
Poleward and upslope range 
shifts of temperate species
With increasing mean global temperatures, effects can be expected on the distribution of habitats, 
communities and ecosystems. 
Research has shown that the distributions of many terrestrial organisms are currently shifting in 
latitude or elevation in response to changing climate. Range changes in elevation include species that 
move upwards in mountain ranges as warming conditions cause habitat ranges to shift higher. 
Species have zones of tolerance (page 345) and so need to shift higher, to colder areas, as the areas 
they live in warm. As the conditions required by their niche change, so too does the distribution of 
the species. These shifting geographic distributions have been recorded in temperate species and 
correlated to anthropogenic temperature increases. Recent studies have examined the effect of 
climate change on tropical species. In Papua New Guinea, studies have shown that montane bird 
species (i.e. species that live in mountainous regions) have moved higher in the mountains in which 
they live, a process known as upslope range shift. 
Data were collected from two mountains in Papua New Guinea  in 2012–13 – Mt Karimui and Karkar 
Island – and compared with historical data from the 1960s (Figure D4.3.10). On both mountains, bird 
species shifted their upper limits upslope significantly, on Mt Karimui by 113 m, and Karkar Island by 
152 m. Upslope shifts also occurred at species’ lower limits on Mt Karimui by 95 m. 
The researchers found that few species were restricted to montane elevations on Karkar Island, so 
upslope shifts in species’ lower limits were not statistically significant there. In addition, the birds’ 
upslope shifts significantly outnumbered their downslope shifts in both mountains at the upper 
limits (Mt Karimui: 87 upslope, 36 downslope; Karkar Island: 17 upslope, 5 downslope) and 
lower limits (Mt Karimui: 39 upslope, 14 downslope). 
	
◆Upslope range 
shift: process where 
montane species move 
higher up the mountains 
in response to recent 
temperature increases.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
831
600
1000
800
1600
1400
1200
–600
–400
–200
1969 upper elevational limit (m)
0
200
400
600
800
change in upper limit (m)
1000
1500
2000
–600
–400
–200
1965 lower elevational limit (m)
0
200
400
600
800
change in lower elevational limit (m)
1000
1500
2000
2500
–500
1965 upper elevational limit (m)
0
500
1000
change in upper elevational limit (m)
a
b
c
 
■Figure D4.3.10 Graphs showing a) the changes in species’ elevational limits for Mt Karimui upper elevational 
limits, b) Mt Karimui lower elevational limits, and c) Karkar Island upper elevational limits. Changes in species’ 
elevational limits between historical and modern resurveys are plotted against historical elevational limits measured 
in the 1960s. Points on the solid zero-change lines represent species with unchanged elevational limits
 ATL D4.3C 
Can you find other examples of similar outcomes to those 
recorded in Papua New Guinea? What affect may upslope 
shifts in animal species have on biodiversity? What may 
happen to species adapted to high elevation when their 
niche requirements move further upslope? Apart from 
‘global action’ to reduce warming, are there ‘local solutions’ 
communities might try? Discuss your findings and thoughts 
with someone else in your class.
These articles are a useful starting point for your research 
and discussions:  
www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.0809320106
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2009/01/090121091239.htm
https://phys.org/news/2022-04-lost-golden-toad-heralds-
climate.html
www.environment.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/ 
0018/32355/Mountain_Pygmy-possum_Burramys_parvus.pdf
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
The distribution of biomes is dependent on climate (page 354). Changes in patterns of rainfall 
associated with climate change, together with alterations in land and sea surface temperatures, will 
lead to shifts in the distribution of biomes. 
The global biome pattern can be expected to change, for example, in response to rising global 
mean surface temperature. Research has shown a range contraction and northward spread in North 
American tree species. One study sampled 92 species in 43 000 plots across eastern North America. 
Latitudinal differences were compared with twentieth-century temperature change. More than half 
of the tree species showed indications that their ranges were shrinking at both their northern and 
southern habitat boundaries. Slightly more species showed their ranges were shifting just north, and 
only a few species indicated an increase at both north and south limits of their range. 
Another study in Quebec, Canada, used forest inventory data of 16 temperate species from 30 years. 
This study also showed that tree species’ ranges had shifted predominantly northward, although the 
responses for different species varied. The shifts in range were greater for tree saplings (0.34 km yr−1) 
than for full-grown trees (0.13 km yr−1). 
The data above are based on the following papers: ‘Evidence for range contraction 
of eastern North American trees’, from 96th ESA Annual Convention 2011, and ‘Tree 
range expansion in eastern North America fails to keep pace with climate warming 
at northern range limits’, from Global Change Biology, 23(8) pages 3292–3301.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
832
Threats to coral reefs as an example 
of potential ecosystem collapse
Corals are colonies of small animals embedded in a calcium carbonate shell that they secrete. They 
form underwater structures, known as coral reefs, in warm, shallow water where sunlight penetrates. 
Specific microscopic photosynthetic algae (zooxanthellae) live sheltered and protected in the cells of 
tropical corals. Coral reefs are the most diverse of ecosystems known and, although they cover less 
than 0.1% of the surface of the oceans, these reefs are home to about 25% of all marine species.
 
■Figure D4.3.11 Coral reefs – a crisis situation; the photo on the left shows healthy 
coral reef and, on the right, bleached coral as the result of climate change
Top tip!
Climate change does not just affect individual species – it also affects the interactions between 
species, such as the mutualistic relationship between coral polyps and zooxanthellae.
Increased release of carbon dioxide (see Table D4.3.2, page 824), ocean currents changing (see Figure 
D4.3.9, page 830) and oceans absorbing more heat as greenhouse gases trap more heat, means 
that ocean temperatures are rising. The corals have a very sensitive range of tolerance: when under 
environmental stress (such as high water temperature), the algae inside the coral are expelled, which 
causes the coral to turn white (bleaching). Mass bleaching events occurred in the Great Barrier Reef 
in 1998, 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020. Multiple bleaching events, or bleaching and other damage, kill 
the coral. 
The coral skeleton is made from calcium carbonate in a process called calcification (see page 353). 
Increased carbon dioxide concentrations cause ocean acidification, however, and the suppression of 
calcification in corals. Once the coral has been lost, other species lose their niches and the coral reef 
loses its biodiversity. Today, coral reefs are dying all around the world, and this loss of corals causes 
the collapse of reef ecosystems. The effects of thermal stress are likely to be exacerbated under future 
climate scenarios. 
Link
Conditions required 
for coral reef 
formation are covered 
in Chapter B4.1, 
page 353; mutualism 
between coral and 
zooxanthellae is 
in Chapter C4.1, 
page 567.
Link
A case study on 
the loss of the 
Great Barrier Reef 
is in Chapter A4.2, 
page 166.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

D4.3   Climate change
833
Afforestation, forest regeneration and 
restoration of peat-forming wetlands as 
approaches to carbon sequestration
 
■Afforestation
Afforestation involves planting trees in deforested areas or places that have never been forested. 
New trees act as carbon sinks and can therefore help with climate change mitigation.
The UN-REDD Programme, launched in 2008, is the United Nations Collaborative Programme on 
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries. UN-REDD 
provides incentives for developing countries to conserve their rainforests by placing a monetary value 
on forest conservation. This is an important example of successful global governance. UN-REDD 
stresses the role of conservation, the sustainable management of forests and the increase of forest 
carbon stocks. By 2020, the total funding had reached almost US$325 million, with contributions 
from Norway, the EU, Denmark, Spain, Japan, Luxembourg and Switzerland. 
China has the largest afforested area in the world, with an average gain of 19 370 km2 of forest per 
year. Between 2020 and 2025, China plans to plant 36 000 km2 of new forest a year, which is more 
than the total area of Belgium.
As well as acting as carbon storage and helping the country offset carbon emissions, the tree-planting 
campaign also aims to stop the spread of deserts (for example of the northern borders of China, 
adjacent to the Gobi Desert), stabilize water resources, and provide local people with sustainably sourced 
resources such as timber and other forest products, according to the World Forest Organisation.
 
■Figure D4.3.12 Farmers use machines to drill tree holes for afforestation activities during the Spring 
Festival in northern China
	
◆Afforestation: the 
establishment of forests in 
an area where there was 
no previous tree cover.
Common 
mistake
Do not confuse 
afforestation and 
reforestation. 
Afforestation is the 
addition of forests 
to land that did not 
originally have them; 
reforestation is the 
restoration of forests 
to lands where they 
once existed.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
834
 
■Agroforestry and forest regeneration
Agroforestry combines agriculture with forestry, allowing the 
farmer to continue cropping while using trees for animal food, 
fuel and building timber: trees protect, shade and fertilize the 
soil, decreasing rates of decomposition and related rates of 
respiration and increasing photosynthesis. Such practices 
improve carbon sequestration in agricultural soils and 
above-ground biomass through a range of soil, crop and 
livestock management practices, and protect existing carbon in 
the system by slowing decomposition of organic matter and 
reducing erosion.
Forest regeneration is the process by which new trees and 
forest species become established after forest trees have been 
harvested or have died from fire, insects or disease. In the 
same way that afforestation increases carbon sequestration, 
forest regeneration ensures that the storage of carbon in trees 
increases and, as a consequence, reduces carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere through the process of photosynthesis.
	
◆Carbon 
sequestration: the 
capture and storage of 
carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere by physical or 
biological processes such 
as photosynthesis.
 
■Figure D4.3.13 Hard tree ferns (Blechnum sp.) growing 
in burnt forest after 2019–20 bushfires in Australia
 
■Restoration of peat-forming wetlands
In acidic and anaerobic conditions found in waterlogged soils, dead organic matter is not fully 
decomposed but accumulates as peat. The largest terrestrial carbon store is found in peatlands. 
From 1640 onwards, large areas of wetland, such as the East Anglian Fens in the UK, were drained 
for farming, which degraded the peat. No longer waterlogged, the peat shrank, decomposed 
and became eroded by the wind, which increased the flux of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. 
Restoring rich peatlands that were lost during agricultural development would enhance the carbon 
sequestration of these wetland ecosystems. Restoring these wetlands increases the land carbon store 
and decreases the atmospheric store. Degraded and drained peatlands emit more than 2 gigatonnes 
of carbon dioxide (GtC) annually: through rewetting of peatlands it is possible to restore carbon 
levels in peat soils that have already been degraded.
Nature of science: Global impact of science
There is active scientific debate over whether plantations of non-native tree species or rewilding with 
native species offer the best approach to carbon sequestration. Peat formation occurs naturally in 
waterlogged soils in temperate and boreal zones, and also very rapidly in some tropical ecosystems.
5	 Define the 
term carbon 
sequestration.
6	 Explain how 
afforestation can 
be used to mitigate 
the effects of 
climate change.
Phenology as research into the 
timing of biological events
The timing of biological events that depend on seasonal cycles, such as flowering, budburst and bud 
set, bird migration and nesting, can be affected by variables such as photoperiod (day length) and 
temperature patterns. 
Flowering needs to coincide with the availability of pollinators, and so timing needs to be carefully 
controlled. Day length determines whether flowering occurs or not. Some species require long days 
(and short nights) to flower, whereas others need shorter days and longer nights.
	
◆Photoperiod: the 
period of time each day 
during which an organism 
receives light, i.e. day 
length.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.3   Climate change
835
Many animals leave the area where they spend spring and summer to escape the colder winter 
months (Chapter B3.3, page 338). For example, the black-throated loon (Gavia arctica) migrates 
south to areas around the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea, and to north-east Atlantic coasts 
and the eastern and western Pacific Ocean. The bird returns to its breeding grounds in early April 
when sea ice in those areas has melted. For birds to rest, temperatures must be warm enough to 
allow a sufficient supply of food for young, such as insects. 
The study of the timing of biological events is known as phenology. Research has shown that 
increases in average global temperatures are affecting the timing of biological events.
Disruption to the synchrony of 
phenological events by climate change 
Climate change can lead to a disruption of the synchrony of 
phenological events. Cerastium arcticum (Arctic mouse-ear) 
is a shrub native to Greenland, northern Canada, Svalbard 
(Norway) and western Siberia. Spring growth of this shrub 
is advancing (i.e. coming earlier in the year) due to climate 
change. Warmer climate provides an increase in the length of 
the growing season for the species, allowing the plants more 
time for establishing, reproducing and spreading.
Many migratory animals, such as the caribou (Rangifer 
tarandus), also known as reindeer (Figure D4.3.14), track the 
growth of spring vegetation during a synchronized spring 
migration. Studies have shown that a combination of snow 
and temperature has a strong influence on autumn migratory 
movements. Earlier availability of ground vegetation can be 
expected to advance caribou migration.
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing 
Exploring
This activity will enable you to demonstrate 
independent thinking, initiative or insight. The 
following site includes a time-lapse image of patterns 
of migration of arctic animals, and includes a link to the 
Arctic Animal Movement Archive (AAMA): 
www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2020/arctic-animals-
movement-patterns-are-shifting-in-different-ways-as-
the-climate-changes
Discuss in groups:
1	 What are some of the similarities and differences 
in the patterns of movement by each of the three 
animal groups represented on the map?
2	 Why do you think the animals were grouped in this 
way? Formulate a hypothesis. 
3	 What differences are suggested in the future 
adaptability of their movements in response to 
climate change? State and explain your predictions 
using scientific understanding.
4	 Why do you think the technical information (data 
sets and sensors used) about individual studies is 
hidden behind a link (AAMA)? Who (mostly) are the 
people who have provided these data?
5	 How would you change this presentation to make its 
message more accessible to (a) an ecologist, and  
(b) a younger audience? 
6	 Why do you think the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) has an interest in 
sharing this research?
T
H
E
 
I
B
 
L
E
A
R
N
E
R
 
P
R
O
F
I
L
E
Link
The black-throated 
loon is discussed 
in more detail in 
Chapter A1.1, page 10.
	
◆Phenology: research 
into the timing of 
seasonal or cyclical 
biological events, such as 
flowering, budburst and 
bud set, bird migration 
and nesting.
 
■Figure D4.3.14 Caribou (Rangifer 
tarandus) migrating in Alaska, USA


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
Theme D: Continuity and change – Ecosystems
836
The timing of reproduction for animals has consequences on the numbers of offspring that will 
survive and reproduce themselves (fitness). The timing of breeding in insectivorous bird species 
(species that feed on insects), for example, needs to coincide with an abundance of their food 
species. A study on great tits (Parus major), published in 2006 in the journal Global Change Ecology, 
measured insect biomass over a 20-year period. The researchers showed that the annual peak date in 
biomass correlated with temperatures from 8 March to 17 May. Egg-laying dates also correlate with 
temperatures, but over an earlier period (16 March–20 April). The food peak also correlates with 
these temperatures. The major difference is that due to climate change, with the synchrony between 
offspring needs and the caterpillar biomass, this cycle was disrupted in the recent warm decades. 
This study indicates that changes in phenology may have severe consequences for both the number 
of fledglings as well as their fledging mass, which is affected by this synchrony of insect biomass. 
Models were used for both the caterpillar biomass peak and for the great tit laying dates, in order 
to predict shifts in caterpillar and bird phenology between 2005–2100, using a model of predicted 
global warming from the IPCC. The model predicts that great tits will start breeding earlier and this 
is predicted to be at the same time period as the earlier food peak. 
Increases to the number of insect life cycles 
within a year due to climate change
Beetles (the order Coleoptera) are the most diverse and abundant group of insects on Earth. They 
inhabit every ecosystem except for the oceans. While most beetles provide vital roles in ecosystem 
dynamics, some species have become pests. One group, the bark beetles, feed on tree plantations, 
damaging and killing trees. There are more than 2000 species of bark beetles. 
Several species of bark beetle attack spruce and pine forests. The great spruce bark 
beetle (Dendroctonus micans) is a non-native (alien) pest of spruce and pine trees in 
Europe, while the Eurasian spruce bark beetle (Ips typographus) is one of the most 
destructive forest insects in Europe, where it has killed more than 50 million m3 of 
Norway spruce (Picea abies) since the 1940s.
Insect species follow one of two different types of life cycle. One life cycle 
has the development of nymphs from eggs, followed by instars (intermediate 
developmental stages) and finally adults. Insects such as locusts and grasshoppers 
follow this life cycle. Other insects produce larvae from eggs (e.g. caterpillars) 
which then form a pupa (where the developing organism is usually enclosed in 
a cocoon or protective covering). In the pupa, the organism undergoes internal 
changes (metamorphosis) where larval structures are replaced by those of the 
adult. Beetles follow the latter life cycle (see Figure D4.3.16).
Bark beetle females bore into the bark of the tree and tunnel through to the phloem where they lay 
eggs, underneath the bark layer (bark is the outer, protective layer of a tree). When the larvae emerge, 
they feed on the sap of the phloem as well as the tissue itself. After pupation, new adults make new 
holes through the bark as they emerge.
Phloem transport sucrose and other organic compounds around the plant (see page 323). The larvae 
damage this tissue, which weakens the tree and can lead to its death. Large areas of forest have been 
affected by outbreaks of bark beetle (Figure D4.3.17).
Insects are sensitive to temperature, have short life cycles and are very mobile. Changes in temperature 
due to climate change therefore can be expected to affect their rate of development and geographical 
distribution. Warming summer and winter temperatures have a major effect on beetle populations and 
	
◆Life cycle: the series 
of changes in the life of 
an organism, including 
reproduction.
eggs
bark beetle
larva
pupa
 
■Figure D4.3.16 Life cycle of a bark beetle
 
■Figure D4.3.15 
Great tit (Parus major) 
with a caterpillar to 
feed to its young
Link
The adaptations of 
phloem sieve tubes 
and companion cells 
for translocation 
of sap is covered 
in Chapter B3.2, 
page 323.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

HL ONLY
D4.3   Climate change
837
increase the chance of outbreaks across the USA and Europe. Temperatures also 
lead to range expansion in some species (for example, beetles spreading to new 
areas as temperatures warm). Climate change may increase the risk of bark beetle 
outbreaks, particularly in old forests in northern Europe. Research in Norway has 
shown that higher temperatures will favour the beetles and cause a transition from 
one to two generations per year in northern latitudes. With two generations per 
year, there will also be two attack periods on spruce, one in the spring and one in 
July/August. The increased number of generations of beetles per year will mean that 
there will be a greater chance that the critical number of beetles needed to kill a tree 
will be reached. In addition, a second generation of bark beetles can more easily kill 
trees, as fewer beetles are needed to overwhelm less‑resistant trees.
Evolution as a consequence of climate change
We have seen how changes in the environment can lead to changes in the selective pressure on 
species, ultimately resulting in the evolution of new species. Can the changes caused by climate 
change result in the evolution of new species?
Evidence suggests that tawny owls (also known as the brown owl, Strix aluco) in southern Finland 
are evolving because of milder winters over many decades. The milder winters have resulted in less 
snow, and so birds with lighter feathers are at a selective disadvantage as they are more visible to 
their prey and so catch less food. Research has shown there has been an increase in dark brown 
tawny owls in a population that was usually dominated by pale grey owls. Darker-coloured brown 
owls, which used to form only 30% of the tawny owl population in Finland, now form 50%. In years 
when winter weather is more severe, there is a higher mortality rate in the brown owl population: 
this could be because brown owls are more visible to predators when there is thick snow cover. This 
research has provided the first evidence for a population evolving in response to climate change. 
Top tip!
We have seen how industrialization led to the increase in the melanic form of the peppered moth 
(see page 784). Changes in the colour variants of tawny owls is another example of human-induced 
change to the environment affecting the fitness of individuals within a population. In both cases, 
the colour variants are still within the same species but, given time, natural selection could lead to 
the evolution of new species.
     
 
■Figure D4.3.18 
Tawny owls have two 
plumage colours, 
brown and grey
LINKING QUESTIONS
1	 What are the impacts of climate change at each level of biological organization?
2	 What processes determine the distribution of organisms on Earth? 
 ATL D4.3D 
Which other pest 
species are being 
affected by climate 
change, and what 
impact is this having 
on the species on 
which they feed and 
reproduce? Research 
one species from your 
local area and produce 
a fact sheet about 
the organism and 
its impact. Use your 
knowledge of biology 
to explain why the 
incidence of the pest is 
increasing and how it 
affects other species. 
What solutions are 
there to reduce the 
impact of the pest?
 
■Figure D4.3.17 Trees killed by 
spruce bark beetle, Colorado, USA
Top tip!
Review your 
knowledge of evolution 
by natural selection 
before reading this 
section. 
