343
Energy from fuels
REACTIVITY 1.3
We are completely dependent on our energy resources. Our ability to harness energy 
has allowed us to transform our world and give us control of what we do and when 
and where we do it. The burning of fuels to provide heat is probably one of the oldest 
human technologies and still accounts for most of our primary energy. All this energy 
can be traced back to the formation of the Earth and the solar system. We are currently 
particularly dependent on the use of fossil fuels, which are a chemical store of solar 
energy from millions of years ago. Carbon dioxide (CO2), released during the complete 
combustion of fossil fuels, is a greenhouse gas and a major cause of global warming. 
Incomplete combustion has resulted in more local pollutants: carbon monoxide and 
soot particulates. We need to find and use alternative high-quality energy sources, 
and the Sun again offers many options. Life itself is driven by the chemical changes of 
photosynthesis, which has always been the ultimate source of our food but can also be 
used to provide biofuels. Whatever energy source we use in the future it will need to 
be more sustainable and more environmentally friendly than those we currently use. 
It is difficult to predict the future, but it is clear our use of energy will have to change. 
Hydrogen is a possible alternative to fossil fuels, and fuel cells offer another source of 
electrical energy without the need for combustion.
The choice of energy 
source is controversial 
and complex. How can 
we navigate issues that 
involve questions and 
claims from different 
areas of knowledge?
View of New York City from 
the International Space 
Station (ISS). This image 
highlights our ability to 
harness energy supplies 
to allow us to control our 
environment.
Oil refinery at dusk. Oil currently provides the world’s economy with the most
energy. It is, however, a limited resource which has a serious negative impact on our
environment. We need to find alternative sources of energy.
What are the challenges of using chemical energy to address our energy 
needs?
Guiding Question


344
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Reactivity 1.3.1 – Combustion reactions
Reactivity 1.3.1 – Reactive metals, non-metals and organic compounds undergo 
combustion reactions when heated in oxygen.
Deduce equations for reactions of combustion, including hydrocarbons and alcohols.
Reactivity 2.2 – Why is high activation energy 
often considered to be a useful property of a 
fuel?
Reactivity 3.2 – Which species are the oxidizing 
and reducing agents in a combustion reaction?
Many substances undergo combustion reactions 
when heated in oxygen
It was originally thought that fire was an element, but we now know it is a process of 
chemical transformation and change. Many substances such as metals, non-metals and 
organic compounds undergo combustion reactions when heated in oxygen.
Nature of Science
Early ideas to explain chemical change in combustion and rusting included 
the ‘phlogiston’ theory. This proposed the existence of a fire-like element that 
was released during these processes. The theory seemed to explain some of 
the observations of its time, although these were purely qualitative. It could 
not explain later quantitative data showing that substances actually gain 
rather than lose mass during burning. In 1783, Lavoisier’s work on oxygen 
confirmed that combustion and rusting involve combination with oxygen 
from the air, so overturning the phlogiston theory. This is a good example of 
how the evolution of scientific ideas, such as how chemical change occurs, is 
based on the need for theories that can be tested by experiment. Where results 
are not compatible with the theory, a new theory must be put forward, which 
must then be subject to the same rigour of experimental test.
Chemistry was a late developer as a physical science. Newton was working on the laws of 
physics more than a century before the work of the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier 
(1743–94) brought chemistry into the modern age. Chemical reactions involve changes 
in smell, colour and texture and these are difficult to quantify. Lavoisier appreciated the 
importance of attaching numbers to properties and recognized the need for precise 
measurement. His use of the balance allowed changes in mass to be used to analyze 
chemical reactions. A quantitative approach helped chemistry develop beyond the 
pseudoscience of alchemy. What differentiates the scientific from the non-scientific or 
‘pseudo-scientific’?
Combustion of metals and non-metals
Combustion is a reaction in which an element or compound burns in oxygen. The 
s block metals form ionic oxides which are basic and p block non-metals generally 
form covalent oxides which are acidic. As discussed in Structure 3.1, some non-metals 
can show a range of oxidation states and form different oxides when they undergo 
combustion.


345
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
Magnesium, for example, forms magnesium oxide and sulfur forms sulfur dioxide:
Mg(s) +  1_
2 O2(g) → MgO(s)
S(s) + O2(g) → SO2(g)
(a)   Magnesium burns with an intensely brilliant 
white flame, leaving a residue of magnesium 
oxide. The metal is sometimes used in flares 
and flashbulbs.
(b)   Sulfur burns with a blue flame in oxygen and 
the reaction produces the toxic gas sulfur 
dioxide.
Worked example 
White phosphorus is an allotrope of phosphorus and exists as P4(s). 
Write an equation for the reaction of white phosphorus (P4) with oxygen gas to 
form phosphorus(V) oxide.
Solution
Start with the unbalanced equation showing the reactants including O2(g)
and products.
P4(s) + 5O2(g) → P4O10 (s)
Balance the Os on the left-hand side as shown in bold.
Most combustion 
reactions are 
exothermic, but 
nitrogen combines with 
oxygen only at high 
temperatures in an 
endothermic reaction 
to produce nitrogen 
monoxide.
Magnesium also reacts 
with nitrogen when 
it burns in the air. As 
discussed in Reactivity 
3.2, this is also an 
oxidation reaction as 
the magnesium loses 
two electrons.
Elemental phosphorus 
exists as two allotropes: 
white phosphorus and 
red phosphorus. White 
phosphorus reacts when 
exposed to air to produce 
two oxides: P4O10(s) and 
P4O6(s).


346
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
As discussed in Reactivity 3.2, these combustion reactions involve electron transfers to 
oxygen. Oxygen is an oxidizing agent in these cases because it accepts electrons. The 
metal or non-metal element is the reducing agent because it loses electrons.
The rusting of iron is also an oxidation reaction but not a combustion reaction. There is no flame involved.
Combustion of organic compounds breaks the 
carbon chain
Many hydrocarbons and alcohols are used as fuels because their combustion 
reactions release energy at a reasonable rate to be useful. Although the compounds 
are energetically unstable relative to their combustion products, they are kinetically 
stable. They do not spontaneously combust because the reaction has a sufficiently 
high activation energy. The high activation energy also allows the fuels to be safely 
transported and stored. Activation energy is discussed in more detail in Reactivity 2.2.
The complete combustion of organic compounds breaks the carbon chain and results 
in the production of carbon dioxide and water and the release of a lot of heat energy.
A number of sources 
claim that combustion 
reactions are 
exothermic, but the 
reaction
N2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2NO(g)
is endothermic. 
Does this falsify the 
claim or is it ‘an 
exception to a rule’?
Is the rule still useful 
or does it need to be 
reconsidered? 
What is the difference 
between such rules and 
scientific laws?
Reactivity 3.2 – Which 
species are the oxidizing 
and reducing agents in a 
combustion reaction?
Reactivity 2.2 – Why is 
high activation energy 
often considered to 
be a useful property 
of a fuel?
Spontaneous combustion. 
The oxidation of glycerin by 
potassium manganate(VII) is 
very exothermic and after a 
few seconds the released heat 
causes the glycerin to ignite 
and burst into flame. 


347
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
For example, propane burns in the presence of excess oxygen to produce carbon 
dioxide and water:
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(l)
This is known as complete combustion because the products are fully oxidized.
When the oxygen supply is limited, incomplete combustion occurs, as discussed in 
the next section.
Similarly, the alcohols with the general formula CnH2n+1OH can be burnt to produce 
similar products:
C2H5OH(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + 3H2O(l)
As discussed in Reactivity 3.2, the carbon atom attached to the OH group can be 
selectively oxidized by oxidizing agents such as potassium dichromate(VI).
Worked example 
Write equations for the complete combustion of pentane.
Solution
Start with the unbalanced equation showing the reactants including O2(g)
and products.
C5H12(g) + _O2(g) →5CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
Balance the Cs and the Hs on the right-hand side as shown in bold above.
Balance the Os on the left-hand side as shown in bold below:
C5H12(g) + 8O2(g) → 5CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
Worked example 
Write the equation for the complete combustion of ethanol.
Solution
Following the same strategy:
C2H5OH(l) + _O2(g) →2CO2(g) + 3H2O(l)
Balance the Os on the left-hand side as shown but do not forget that the alcohol has 
an O atom:
C2H5OH(l) + 3O2(g) →2CO2(g) + 3H2O(l)
The combustion of 
organic molecules 
involves the formation 
and reaction of many 
radicals. The colour 
of a ﬂ ame is due 
to the presence of 
carbon radicals which 
eventually all break up 
to form carbon dioxide. 
The combustion of organic compounds that contain elements other than carbon, 
hydrogen and oxygen produces a range of other products. Compounds containing 
nitrogen for example can release nitrogen gas or different nitrogen oxides. Combustion 
analysis can be used to determine the empirical formula of a compound as discussed 
in Structure 1.4.


348
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
(a)   Ethanol burns with a relatively clean (not too 
sooty) flame, having a relatively short chain 
of carbon atoms for each molecule.
(b)   Glucose is a carbohydrate which burns to 
produce carbon dioxide and water vapour, 
leaving behind carbon. The process releases a 
large amount of energy. Metabolism releases an 
equivalent amount of energy to burning, but in 
a slower, more controlled, and less direct way.
Challenge yourself
1. A compound containing carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen was analyzed by 
combustion. 0.20 g of the compound produced 0.456 g of carbon dioxide and 
0.248 g of water. Identify the empirical formula of the compound.
Q1. Identify the element in the third period which reacts with the least amount of 
oxygen when 1.0 mol of the element undergoes complete combustion.
A 
aluminium 
B 
magnesium 
C 
sodium  
D 
sulfur
Q2. 1 mol of an organic compound X was found to require 2.5 mol of molecular 
oxygen for complete combustion. Which of the following could be X?
I. 
C2H2 
 II. CH3CHO 
 
III. 
C2H5OH
A 
I and II only 
B 
I and III only C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III
Q3. Hydrazine, N2H4, is used as a rocket fuel. It reacts according to the 
thermochemical equation:
N2H4(l) + O2(g) → N2(g) + 2H2O(l) 
 
∆H⊖= –623 kJ mol–1
Hydrazine does not, however, burn spontaneously in oxygen. What is the 
best explanation for this?
A 
Hydrazine is a liquid. 
B 
The N≡N triple bond is too strong.
C 
The activation energy is too high. D 
The reaction is endothermic.
Exercise


349
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
Q4. What mass of carbon dioxide is produced when 2.9 g of butane undergoes 
complete combustion?
Q5. The complete combustion of 0.60 g of a liquid compound, X, produces 0.88 g 
of carbon dioxide gas and 0.36 g of water vapour. What is the empirical 
formula of X?  
Q6. Deduce the general equation for complete combustion of a hydrocarbon CxHy
Reactivity 1.3.2 – Incomplete combustion of 
organic compounds
Reactivity 1.3.2 – Incomplete combustion of organic compounds, especially 
hydrocarbons, leads to the production of carbon monoxide and carbon.
Deduce equations for the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons and alcohols.
Inquiry 2 – What might be observed when 
a fuel such as methane is burnt in a limited 
supply of oxygen?
Reactivity 2.1 – How does limiting the supply 
of oxygen in combustion affect the products 
and increase health risks?
Incomplete combustion of organic compounds 
produces carbon monoxide and carbon
Carbon dioxide and water are produced in complete combustion when there is 
a plentiful supply of air, but carbon monoxide or carbon in the form of soot are 
produced during incomplete combustion. This happens if the supply of air is limited 
or when the compound has a high percentage of carbon content.
(a)   A Bunsen burner burns methane. The flame is controlled 
with a vent that changes the fuel : air mixture.  Complete 
combustion produces a hot, blue flame. Incomplete 
combustion produces a yellow flame.
(b)   Combustion of hydrocarbons with 
a benzene ring produces a sooty 
yellow flame due to their high 
percentage of carbon content.


350
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
For example, the incomplete combustion of propane produces soot, C(s), or 
carbon monoxide.
2C3H8(g) + 7O2(g) → 6CO(g) + 8H2O(g)
C3H8(g) + 2O2(g) → 3C(g) + 4H2O(g)
Compounds with higher carbon content generally undergo more incomplete 
combustion and produce more soot when the oxygen supply is limited. 
This can be used to distinguish different organic compounds.
Worked example 
How could samples of cyclohexane (C6H12), cyclohexene (C6H10) and 
methylbenzene (CH3C6H5) be distinguished by observing their combustion?
Solution
Calculate the percentage carbon composition by mass in each of the three 
compounds.
C6H12
C6H10
CH3C6H5
M / g mol–1
84
82
92
% of C
86
88
91
Methylbenzene will produce the sootiest ﬂ ame and cyclohexane the least 
sooty ﬂ ame.
Worked example 
Give the balanced equation for the formation of carbon monoxide (CO) in the 
internal combustion engine caused by the incomplete combustion of octane, 
C8H18(l).
Solution
First write the unbalanced equation with H2O(g), produced at the temperature of 
the engine, and CO(g) as products.
C8H18(l) + _O2(g) →8CO(g) + 9H2O(g)
Balance the carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms from left to right as shown in 
bold above.
Then balance the oxygen atoms (from right to left) as shown in bold below.
C8H18(l) + 8 1_
2O2(g) → 8CO(g) + 9H2O(g)
Multiply  × 2 if an equation with only integers is needed:
2C8H18(l) + 17O2(g) → 16CO(g) + 18H2O(g)
Limiting the amount 
of oxygen limits the 
extent to which the 
carbon in organic 
compounds can 
be oxidized. Soot 
is produced when 
there is a very 
limited amount of 
oxygen available.
This household device is 
designed to detect excessive 
levels of carbon monoxide 
(CO) which can be produced 
by malfunctioning gas boilers 
or ﬁ res. After six hours of 
exposure, 35 ppm of CO 
produces headaches and 
dizziness. Within hours, 
800 ppm of CO causes 
unconsciousness, with higher 
levels causing death.
The combustion of an 
organic liquid can be 
observed by placing a 
few drops of the liquid 
on a watch glass.
Inquiry 2 – What might 
be observed when a 
fuel such as methane is 
burnt in a limited supply 
of oxygen?


351
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
As mentioned in Structure 3.1, catalytic converters are used in cars to fully oxidize 
carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide:
2CO(g) + O2(g) → 2CO2(g)
and to convert unburnt and partially burnt fuel hydrocarbons to carbon dioxide 
and water.
Three-way catalytic converters also reduce nitrogen oxides to nitrogen and oxygen.
2CO(g) + 2NO(g) → 2CO2(g) + N2(g)
Carbon monoxide (CO) is toxic to humans because it affects oxygen uptake in the blood. It 
is absorbed by the lungs and binds to haemoglobin (Hb) in red blood cells more effectively 
than oxygen.
 
Hb 
+ 
CO 
 
COHb
haemoglobin 
 
 carboxyhemoglobin
This prevents oxygen from being transported around the body. It can cause dizziness at low 
concentrations and can be fatal at high levels. As it is a colourless, odourless gas, it can rise to 
dangerous levels without being detected.
Carbon or soot produced from the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons and coal in 
power stations is an example of a particulate. Particulates are solid particles of carbon or 
dust, or liquid droplets suspended in the air. They generally have a diameter in the range 
0.001–10 μm, which is just large enough to be seen. They enter the body during breathing 
and can affect the respiratory system and cause lung diseases such as emphysema, bronchitis 
and cancer. Although they are sometimes inert solids, they are dangerous pollutants because 
they can act as catalysts in the production of secondary pollutants and increase the harmful 
effects of gaseous pollutants.
Challenge yourself
2. Explain how nitrogen oxides are formed in an internal combustion engine and 
suggest an effect of these pollutants.
Q7. Deduce the general equation for the incomplete combustion of a 
hydrocarbon CxHy which produces carbon monoxide.
Q8. Deduce the equation for the incomplete combustion of hexane which 
produces equal amounts of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide.
Q9. (a) State the equation for the complete combustion of octane.
(b) Calculate the mass of oxygen which reacts with 1.00 g of octane during 
complete combustion.
(c) Assume that 20% by mass of the air is made up of oxygen. Calculate the 
mass of air which reacts with 1.00 g of octane.
(d) Explain why carbon monoxide is a dangerous pollutant.
(e) State one method of controlling carbon monoxide emissions from 
automobile engines.
Reactivity 2.1 – 
How does limiting the 
supply of oxygen in 
combustion aﬀ ect the 
products and increase 
health risks?
Parts per million 
(ppm) is a measure of 
concentration often 
used for pollutants 
present at low but 
dangerous levels.
Exercise


352
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Reactivity 1.3.3 – Fossil fuels
Reactivity 1.3.3 – Fossil fuels include coal, crude oil and natural gas, which have 
different advantages and disadvantages.
Evaluate the amount of carbon dioxide added to the atmosphere when different fuels burn.
Understand the link between carbon dioxide levels and the greenhouse effect.
The tendency for incomplete combustion 
and energy released per unit mass should be 
covered.
Structure 3.2 – Why do larger hydrocarbons 
have a greater tendency to undergo incomplete 
combustion?
Nature of Science, Reactivity 3.2 – What 
are some of the environmental, economic, 
ethical and social implications of burning 
fossil fuels?
An ideal fuel releases signiﬁ cant amounts of energy 
at a reasonable rate and produces minimal pollution
An energy source needs to be cheap, plentiful, and readily accessible, and provide 
high-quality energy at a reasonable rate – not too fast or too slow. It should do all this 
in a way that has minimal effect on the environment. We all use a great range of energy 
sources. Some of these, such as wood, are ancient technologies, while others, such as 
nuclear power and solar cells, are very recent. Most of our energy derives from the Sun, 
which drives the climate and photosynthesis. Humans harness this energy indirectly 
by burning fossil fuels. Oil is the fossil fuel that currently provides the world’s 
economy with the most energy, but this will change. Its use has had a very negative 
impact on our environment.
Fossil fuels are non-renewable and wood is a renewable 
source
Fossil fuels are non-renewable and non-sustainable energy sources as it takes millions 
of years for fossil fuels to form. They are used at a rate faster than they can be replaced 
and our finite resources will run out. Wood, by contrast, is a renewable source as trees 
can be grown to replace those chopped down to provide wood as fuel. Biofuels are 
discussed in more detail in the next section.
The properties of four fuels are summarized in the table below. The energy density of 
a fuel is the energy produced per unit volume, and the specific energy is the energy 
produced per unit mass.
The liquid fuels have significantly greater energy densities than the gases.
Formula
Energy released per 
unit mass / kJ g−1
Energy released 
per unit / kJ cm−3
H2(g)
142
0.0129
CH4(g)
55.5
0.0401
C8H18(l)
47.9
33.7
CH3OH(l)
22.7
18.0


353
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
One advantage of using gasoline or petrol, which has octane as a main component, in 
car engines is its high energy density. Methane is preferred to hydrogen in pipelines 
for the same reason.  When the mass of the fuel is important, for example in rockets, 
hydrogen is a better choice with its high specific energy. Hydrogen is the only fuel here 
which does not produce the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.
Fossil fuels were formed by the reduction of 
biological compounds
The fossil fuels have been described as ‘sunshine in the solid, liquid and gaseous form’, 
as their energy comes from sunlight which was trapped by green plants millions of 
years ago. Fossil fuels are produced by the slow and partial decomposition of plant and 
animal matter that is trapped in the absence of air. Oxygen is lost from the biological 
molecules at a faster rate than other elements (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur). 
This results in reduced biological compounds which are generally hydrocarbons.
Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel
Coal is a combustible sedimentary rock formed from the remains of plant life which 
have been subject to geological heat and pressure. This action changed plant material 
in stages to increase the percentage of the carbon content. Anthracite, for example, is 
formed under conditions of very high heat and pressure and is almost pure carbon, but 
coal generally contains between 80% and 90% carbon by mass. Coal occurs in many 
areas, though the majority of the world’s supplies are in the northern hemisphere. 
It is by far the most plentiful of the Earth’s fossil fuels.
Burning anthracite. 
Anthracite has a fixed carbon 
content of 92–98%. It burns 
with a short blue flame and 
no noticeable smoke.


354
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Nature of Science
Coal fueled much of the Industrial Revolution, which led to important 
advances in both science and technology. The development of steam power 
was crucial to a country’s economy, but to understand the link between 
heat and work scientists had to unravel the nature of energy – its quality and 
its quantity and the underlying molecular basis for the laws governing the 
transfer of heat into work. Whatever the field, whether it is pure science or 
engineering technology, there is boundless scope for creative and imaginative 
thinking.
Crude oil is a valuable fuel and chemical feedstock
Crude oil is one of the most important raw materials in the world today. It is a complex 
mixture of straight-chain and branched-chain saturated alkanes, cycloalkanes and 
aromatic compounds, and, in smaller quantities, compounds of nitrogen, oxygen and 
sulfur. It supplies us with the fuels we need for transport and electricity generation 
and is an important chemical feedstock for the production of important organic 
compounds such as polymers, pharmaceuticals, dyes and solvents.
Crude oil was formed over millions of years from the remains of marine animals 
and plants, which were trapped under layers of rock. Under these conditions of high 
temperature and high pressure, organic matter decays in the presence of bacteria and 
the absence of oxygen. As it is a limited resource chemists will need to consider other 
sources of carbon, both as a fuel and as a chemical feedstock.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) is an intergovernmental 
organization set up to stabilize oil markets in order to secure an efficient, economic, 
and regular supply of petroleum. There are political implications in being dependent on 
imported oil and gas. Price fluctuations have a significant effect on national economies; 
supplies and energy resources are therefore an important bartering tool in political 
disputes.
Oil and gas are easier to extract than coal since they are fluids and can be pumped up 
from underground reserves. It is possible to extract oil from beneath the sea. There are 
risks and benefits in using oil as a source of energy or as a source of carbon to make 
new products.
Petrol is a highly concentrated and convenient energy source for use in transport. It could 
be argued, however, that burning hydrocarbons, with their resulting environmental side-
effects such as smog and global warming, is a misuse of this valuable resource. When the 
great Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev (Structure 3.1) visited the oils fields of Azerbaijan 
at the end of the 19th century, he is said to have likened the burning of oil as a fuel to ‘firing 
up a kitchen stove with banknotes’.
Natural gas is mainly methane
Methane is the primary constituent of natural gas, which also contains nitrogen and 
sulfur compounds (hydrogen sulfide) as impurities. Natural gas was formed millions 
of years ago by the action of heat, pressure, and perhaps bacteria on buried organic 
matter. The gas is trapped in geological formations capped by impermeable rock. 
It is also formed from the decomposition of crude oil and coal deposits. It can occur 
A petrol pump supplies 
energy to a car at a 
rate of about 34 MW 
(34 MJ s–1).


355
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
almost entirely on its own, dissolved under pressure in oil, or in a layer above the oil 
in a reservoir. Natural gas can also be found associated with coal when it is a major 
hazard as it forms an explosive mixture with air.
Natural gas is the cleanest of the fossil fuels to burn due to its low percentage carbon 
content. Impurities can easily be removed, and the combustion of natural gas produces 
minimal amounts of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and particulates. Where it is 
available as mains gas, it flows through pipes to wherever it is needed, so little energy 
is needed to transport the gas from the ground to the consumer. Setting up such a 
distribution network, however, involves a massive capital investment, and in some 
countries liquefied gas (butane or propane) is used instead for domestic heating and 
cooking when no network is available.
Natural gas pipelines.
The past and future of fossil fuels
As civilization has advanced, the carbon content of fuel has decreased. Coal was the 
first fossil fuel to be used. It is the most abundant and easiest to obtain and most 
similar in properties to charcoal, which was generally used as a fuel by primitive 
cultures. Coal has mainly been replaced by gasoline and natural gas as the fuel of 
choice as they have higher specific energies and energy densities and are easier to 
transport. The two fluids, gas and oil, are also cleaner burning and produce less 
carbon dioxide per unit energy.
Constructing 
international pipelines 
has financial costs and 
political risks.
The choice of fossil 
fuel used by different 
countries depends on 
historical, geological 
and technological 
factors. Different 
societies have different 
priorities in their energy 
choices


356
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
The advantages and disadvantages of the three fossil fuels are summarized below.
Coal
Petroleum
Natural gas
Advantages
Cheap and plentiful 
throughout the world.
Longest lifespan compared 
to other fossil fuels.
Can be converted into 
synthetic liquid fuels 
and gases.
Safer than nuclear power.
Ash produced can be used 
in making roads.
Easily transported in 
pipelines or by tankers.
Convenient fuel for use in 
cars as volatile and burns 
easily.
High enthalpy density.
Sulfur impurities can be 
easily removed.
Higher speciﬁ c energy.
Clean; produces fewer 
pollutants per unit energy.
Easily transported in 
pipelines and pressurized 
containers.
Does not contribute to 
acid rain.
Disadvantages
Contributes to global 
warming due to CO2.
Contributes to acid 
rain, SO2.
Produces particulates 
(electrostatic preceptors 
can remove most of these).
Difﬁ cult to transport.
Waste can lead to visual 
and chemical pollution.
Mining is dangerous.
Limited lifespan and 
uneven world distribution.
Contributes to acid rain 
and global warming.
Transport can lead to 
pollution.
Carbon monoxide is a 
local pollutant produced 
by incomplete combustion 
of gasoline in internal 
combustion engines.
Photochemical smog is 
produced as a secondary 
pollutant due to reactions 
of the primary pollutants 
(nitrogen oxides and 
hydrocarbons) released 
from internal combustion 
engines.
Limited supplies.
Contributes to global 
warming.
Risk of explosion due 
to leaks.
One measure of the impact our activities have on the environment is given by our 
carbon footprint. The carbon footprint is a measurement of all the greenhouse gases we 
individually produce. It has units of mass of carbon dioxide equivalent and depends on 
the amount of greenhouse gases we produce in our day-to-day activities through the use 
of fossil fuels – such as heating, transport and electricity. ‘Carbon footprint’ has become 
a widely used term in the public debate on our responsibilities in the fight against global 
climate change.
All fossil fuels are 
non-renewable 
and produce the 
greenhouse gas 
carbon dioxide.


357
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
Nature of Science
There is some limited consensus on how to quantify a carbon footprint. 
Some questions are:
•  Should the carbon footprint include just carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions or 
include other greenhouse gas emissions such as methane as well?
•  Should it be restricted to carbon-based gases or can it include substances 
that do not have carbon in their molecules such as dinitrogen monoxide, 
which is another greenhouse gas?
•  Should it include other gases such as carbon monoxide (CO), which is a toxic 
primary pollutant that can be oxidized to carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?
Scientific terms which have an impact on the public must be clearly communicated.
Challenge yourself
3. On a typical winter’s day, 1.33 × 106 kJ of energy is needed in a home.
 
The specific energy densities and approximate empirical formulae of wood and 
coal and the efficiency of the heating systems are tabulated below.
Fuel
Formula of fuel
Speciﬁ c energy / kJ g–1
Efﬁ ciency of heating / %
Coal
CH
31
65
Wood
C5H9O4
22
70
(a) Calculate the percentage mass of carbon in the two fuels.
(b) Determine the carbon footprint from using the two forms of heating in 
terms of the mass of carbon dioxide produced by the two fuels.
(c) Suggest a reason why the carbon footprint calculation for wood does not 
give a full account of its impact on the environment.
Combustion of the alkanes in detail
Here we look at the combustion of the alkanes in a little more detail.
Carbon content and incomplete combustion in the alkanes
As discussed earlier, the incomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon results in the 
incomplete combustion of the carbon in the compound with the production of carbon 
monoxide and carbon. The higher the carbon content of the compound, the greater 
the tendency for incomplete combustion. Consider the carbon content of the alkanes.
Alkane
CH4
C2H6
C3H8
C4H10
C5H12
C6H14
C7H16
C8H18
% Carbon content
74.8
79.9
81.7
82.6
83.2
83.6
83.9
84.1
Mass of CO2 /g when 1 
g of fuel is burnt
2.74
2.93
2.99
3.03
3.05
3.06
3.07
3.08
Energy released per 
unit mass / kJ g–1
61.1
51.9
50.3
49.5
48.6
48.3
0.0
47.9


358
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
The increase in percentage carbon content down the homologous series suggests that 
incomplete combustion increases with the length of the carbon chain.
This supports the claim that natural gas, which is mostly methane, is the cleanest of the 
fossil fuels to burn, and coal, which has a very high carbon content, is the dirtiest.
Carbon content and carbon dioxide production during 
complete combustion
The amount of carbon dioxide gas produced by a fuel is another important factor when 
considering the use of different fuels. Complete combustion of a hydrocarbon produces 
carbon dioxide and water, and the mass of carbon dioxide produced per unit mass of 
fuel increases with the percentage carbon content as shown in the previous table.
This also supports the claim that natural gas is the cleanest of the fossil fuels to burn 
and coal is the dirtiest.
Worked example 
Calculate the mass of carbon dioxide produced when 1.00 g of pentane undergoes 
complete combustion.
Solution
C5H12(l) + 8O2(g)→ 5CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
 
1 mol 
5 mol
n(CO2(g)) = 5n(C5H12(l))
= 5 ×  
1.00
___________________ 
 
(12.01 × 5) + (1.01 × 12) = 5 ×  1.00
_____
72.17 
mass(CO2(g)) = 5 ×  44.01
_____
72.17 = 3.05 g
The mass of carbon dioxide produced for the other alkanes is calculated in the same way.
Carbon content and specific energy in the alkanes
We saw earlier that hydrogen has higher specific energy than methane. Comparing the 
specific energy of the alkanes we see that the higher the percentage carbon content 
(and the lower the percentage hydrogen), the lower the specific energy.
The energy obtained per gram of CO2 produced during complete combustion (Figure 
1) is another important consideration when choosing fuels.
number of carbon atoms
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
energy per gram of CO2  / kJ gm–1
Structure 3.2 – Why do 
larger hydrocarbons 
have a greater tendency 
to undergo incomplete 
combustion?
Structure 3.2 – Why 
is carbon dioxide 
described as a 
greenhouse gas?
R1.3 Figure 1 A graph 
showing how the energy 
obtained per gram of CO2
produced varies with the 
length of the carbon chain 
in the alkanes. 
Comparing the 
enthalpy of pentane 
and hexane. Full details 
of how to carry out 
this experiment with a 
worksheet are available 
in the eBook.


359
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
The graph in Figure 1 shows that natural gas (which is mainly CH4) produces the most 
energy per gram of CO2 added to the atmosphere. The higher alkanes found in petroleum 
and carbon in coal produce less energy for the same level of carbon dioxide pollution.
Fossil fuels and the greenhouse effect
The level of carbon dioxide produced from burning fossil fuels has been increasing 
steadily over the last 200 years.
Carbon dioxide levels and the greenhouse effect
Levels of carbon dioxide have been measured at Mauna Loa in Hawaii since the 
International Geophysical Year in 1957 (Figure 2).
parts per million
1960
1970
1980
1990
year
Atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa Observatory
Scripps Institution of Oceanography
NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory
2000
2010
2020
320
340
360
380
400
420
We can compare the increase in levels of carbon dioxide to changes in average global 
temperatures during the same period (Figure 3). It is estimated that carbon dioxide 
contributes about 50% to global warming.
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
13.4
13.6
13.8
13.9
14
14.2
14.4
14.6
14.8
15
15.2
year
average monthly temperature / ˚C
R1.3 Figure 3 Global average temperatures from 1950 to 2016.
R1.3 Figure 2 Graph 
showing the rising 
concentration of atmospheric 
CO2 between 1958–2021 
measured 4170 m up on 
Mauna Loa, Hawaii. The 
graph shows the steady 
rise of CO2 levels in the 
atmosphere each year due 
to increasing fossil fuel 
consumption. The regular 
fluctuations reflect seasonal 
plant growth in the spring 
and decay in the autumn in 
the northern hemisphere 
each year.
The Mauna Loa Observatory 
monitors all atmospheric 
constituents that may 
contribute to climatic 
change, such as greenhouse 
gases and aerosols.


360
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Nature of Science
Data are not enough to prove the causal link between CO2 concentration and 
temperature. Both changes could be due to changes in a third variable. The 
ideas of correlation and cause are very important in science. A correlation is a 
statistical link or association between one variable and another. To establish a 
causal relationship, scientists need to have a plausible mechanism linking the 
factors. This has been proposed in the case of the greenhouse effect. Ideally, 
however, the relationship between the variables needs to be experimentally 
investigated with all other possible key variables being controlled. This is often 
impossible; levels of carbon dioxide cannot be added to the environment in 
such a controlled way, and so we need to rely on computer models.
Greenhouse gases allow shortwave radiation from the Sun to pass through the 
atmosphere but absorb the longer wave infrared radiation re-radiated from the 
Earth’s surface. As discussed in Structure 3.2, carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas as 
its molecules increase their vibrational energy by absorbing infrared radiation. Three 
of the vibrational modes of the carbon dioxide molecule are IR active – the dipole 
changes as it vibrates (Figure 4). The molecules then re-radiate this energy back to the 
Earth’s surface, contributing to global warming.
symmetric stretch
IR inactive
As the molecule
remains symmetrical,
it has no change 
in dipole.
asymmetric stretch
≈ 2350 cm21
The molecule has a
temporary dipole
moment when the
C     O bond lengths
are of unequal length.
two symmetric bends ≈ 670 cm21
The molecule has a temporary dipole
moment as it bends away from its linear
geometry. The two vibrations are
identical, except that one is in the plane
of the page and the other is out of the
plane of the page.
Challenge yourself
4. (a)  Suggest why the first measurements of CO2 levels were taken at Mauna Loa 
in Hawaii and at the South Pole.
 
(b)  Explain the annual fluctuations in CO2 levels at Mauna Loa.
 
(c)  Identify two different means by which CO2 can be removed from the 
atmosphere naturally and give balanced equations for both of these.
 
(d)  Suggest how the depletion of tropical forests can lead to an increase in 
CO2 levels.
The impact of increasing amounts of greenhouse 
gases on the climate
There is little doubt that, since the 19th century, the amount of carbon dioxide and 
other anthropogenic (resulting from the impact of humans on nature) greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere have increased dramatically and that the average temperature 
of the world has also increased, even if rather erratically. It has been suggested that 
R1.3 Figure 4 Three of the 
vibrational modes of the 
carbon dioxide molecule 
are IR active. The symmetric 
stretch produces no change 
in dipole and so is IR inactive. 


361
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
levels of carbon dioxide will double in about 100 years. Allowing for the effect of 
all the gases, the temperature of the Earth could rise by 2 °C within 50 years. These 
temperature changes could have a drastic effect on the climate, for example:
• changes in agriculture such as crop yields
• changes in biodistribution due to desertification and loss of cold-water fish 
habitats
• rising sea levels because of thermal expansion and the melting of polar ice caps 
and glaciers.
Retreating glacier in Iceland most probably caused by global warming.
Q10. Consider the following speciﬁ c energies of different fuels.
Fuel
Speciﬁ c energy / kJ g–1
Carbon content by mass / %
Coal
32
94
Oil
42
83
Natural gas
55
75
Wood
15
70
Hydrogen
142
0
(a) Suggest an explanation for the trend in speciﬁ c energies between coal, 
oil, natural gas and hydrogen.
(b) The choice of fuel also depends on other factors besides speciﬁ c 
energies. One of these is the amount of carbon dioxide produced. 
Explain why this is an important factor to consider.
(c) Calculate the carbon dioxide production for 1000 kJ of energy from 
each source and identify the best and worst fuel on this basis.
Q11. An analytical chemist determines the percentage composition by mass 
of a sample of coal.
C
H
O
N
S
84.96
5.08
7.55
0.73
1.68
(a) Determine the empirical formula of the coal.
(b) Explain how the combustion of the coal could produce acid rain. 
Give equations to illustrate how the elements in the coal can produce 
acidic gases.
Exercise
Some people question 
the reality of climate 
change and question 
the motives of scientists 
who have ‘exaggerated’ 
the problem. How do 
we assess the evidence 
collected and the 
models used to predict 
the impact of human 
activities? What effect 
does a highly sensitive 
political context have 
on objectivity? Can 
politicians exploit 
the ambiguity of 
conclusions coming 
from the scientific 
community for their 
own ends?
Nature of science, 
Reactivity 3.2 – 
What are some of 
the environmental, 
economic, ethical and 
social implications of 
burning fossil fuels?


362
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Q12. The coal burnt in a 500 MW (500 × 103 kJ s−1) power station has a speciﬁ c 
energy of 33.0 kJ g−1.
(a) Determine the mass of coal burnt each second when the power station 
is operating at full capacity, assuming an efﬁ ciency of 38%.
(b) The empirical formula of the coal can be approximated as CH. 
Calculate the mass of carbon dioxide produced each second.
Q13. State three reasons for not relying on carbon-containing fuels in 
the future.
Q14. Crude oil currently provides a greater percentage of the world’s energy 
than any other energy source.
(a) State three reasons for its wide use as an energy source.
(b) Describe brieﬂ y how crude oil is formed in nature.
Q15. State three reasons why, worldwide, gas is preferred to oil as a fuel in 
power stations.
Reactivity 1.3.4 – Biofuels
Reactivity 1.3.4 – Biofuels are produced from the biological ﬁ xation of carbon over a 
short period of time through photosynthesis.
Understand the difference between renewable and non-renewable energy sources.
Consider the advantages and disadvantages of biofuels.
The reactants and products of photosynthesis 
should be known.
Photosynthesis converts light energy into chemical 
energy
Energy from the Sun fuels the sequence of redox reactions that is photosynthesis. 
Chlorophyll, the green pigment in green plants, absorbs solar energy which is 
then used to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose. The reactions can be 
summarized by the equation:
6CO2(l)+ 6H2O(l) → C6H12O6(s) + 6O2(g)
The products of photosynthesis can be used for food, as a primary fuel such as wood, 
or converted to other fuels such as ethanol. Biofuels, produced from the biological 
fixation of carbon over a short period of time, are a renewable and sustainable energy 
source. Photosynthesis is not very efficient, however, so relatively little of the available 
solar energy is trapped.


363
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
Challenge yourself
5. One part of the Earth’s surface receives 1.25 × 106 J of solar energy. 
Green plants such as algae absorb 1.25 × 104 J of this energy.
 
(a) Determine the percentage of the Sun’s energy absorbed by green plants.
 
(b)  Suggest two reasons why the remainder of the Sun’s energy is not absorbed 
by green plants.
Wood is mainly cellulose, a polymer made up of glucose molecules. 
Comparing coal with wood is very useful as the latter has not been subject to the 
same geological conditions.
Worked example 
Coal and wood are used domestically to provide heating.
Percentage composition
Speciﬁ c energy / kJ g–1
C
H
O
N
Wood
50
6
43
1
10–18
Bituminous coal
88
5
5–15
1
30
Anthracite
95
2–3
2–3
Trace
31
(a) Describe the relationship between the oxygen content of a fuel and its 
speciﬁ c energy.
(b) Describe how the compositions of the fuels change as they are exposed to 
high pressure.
(c) State two advantages of coal use over wood.
(d) State one advantage of the use of wood.
(e) Discuss some of the disadvantages of the use of coal.
(f) What harmful pollutants are produced when wood is burnt in an 
enclosed space?
Solution
(a) The lower the oxygen content the greater its speciﬁ c energy.
(b) Oxygen (and water vapour) are lost as the pressure increases.
(c) Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel and has a high speciﬁ c energy.
(d) Wood is a renewable and sustainable fuel.
(e) Difﬁ cult and expensive to mine and transport; produces sulfur oxides, which 
lead to acid rain, particulates (soot) and carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas 
which leads to global warming; mining has an environmental impact.
(f) Particulates (soot), hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide are produced due to 
incomplete combustion.
Wood-burning stove. Wood 
has a lower specific energy 
than fossil fuels due to 
its relatively high oxygen 
content.


364
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Ethanol can be used as a biofuel
Ethanol is a liquid biofuel, which can be used in internal combustion engines. It can be 
made from biomass by fermenting plants high in starches and sugars.
C6H12O6 → 2C2H5OH + 2CO2
This process can be carried out at approximately 37 °C in the absence of oxygen by 
yeast, which provides an enzyme which catalyzes the reaction.
Worked example 
(a) State the equation for the complete combustion of ethanol.
(b) The enthalpy of combustion of ethanol is –1367 kJ mol–1. 
Calculate the speciﬁ c energy of ethanol in kJ g–1.
(c) Compare this value with the corresponding value for octane and explain 
the difference.
Solution
(a) C2H5OH(l) + 3O2(g) → 3H2O(l) + 2CO2(g)
(b) heat produced by one mole of ethanol (46.08 g) = 1367 kJ
 
heat produced by 1.00 g =  –1367
______
46.08  kJ g–1  = 29.67 kJ g–1
(c) heat produced by one mole of octane (114.26 g) = 5470 kJ
 
heat produced by 1.00 g =  –5470
______
114.26 kJ g–1 = 47.87 kJ g–1
Less heat is produced per unit mass with ethanol because it is already 
partially oxidized.
Gasohol is a mixture of 10% ethanol and 90% unleaded gasoline. Ethanol can be 
produced from several types of plant material and gasohol can generally be substituted 
for gasoline with only minor changes in fuel consumption and performance. 
The advantages of using ethanol include:
• It is renewable.
• It produces lower emissions of carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides.
• It decreases a country’s dependence on oil.
One disadvantage is that ethanol absorbs water as it can form hydrogen bonds with 
the water molecules in the atmosphere. This leads to the ethanol separating from the 
hydrocarbon components in the fuel. It can also cause corrosion.
Methanol can also be used; it is produced by heating wood in the presence of steam 
and limited amounts of oxygen.


365
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
Challenge yourself
6. A possible incomplete equation for the conversion of wood into hydrogen, 
carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide is:
2C16H23O11 + 19H2O + O2 →xH2 + yCO + zCO2
 
(a) Identify the oxidation number of all the elements in the equation.
 
(b) Identify the elements which are oxidized and reduced in the reaction.
 
(c) Deduce the value of x by balancing the hydrogen atoms.
 
(d)  Determine the values of y and z by balancing the changes of oxidation 
numbers and the number of carbon atoms.
 
(e)  Deduce how many methanol molecules can be produced from one wood 
molecule.
Methane can be made from the bacterial breakdown of plant material in the absence 
of oxygen. The process can be controlled to produce a clean burning biogas such as 
natural gas.
Carbohydrates, for example, produce a mixture which is about 50% methane:
C6H12O6(s) → 3CO2(g)+ 3CH4(g)
Fats with a lower oxygen content produce 72% methane:
2C15H31COOH + 14H2O → 9CO2 + 23CH4
The advantages and disadvantages of using 
biofuels
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cheap and readily available.
If crops/trees are replanted, they can be a 
renewable and sustainable source.
Less polluting than fossil fuels. 
Uses land which could be used for other 
purposes, such as growing food.
High cost of harvesting and transportation in 
large volumes.
Takes nutrients from soil/uses large amounts 
of fertilizers.
Lower speciﬁ c energy than fossil fuels.
Test flight to study the effects 
of the use of biofuels. A 
50–50 blend of JP-8 Jet fuel 
and a renewable alternative 
fuel produced from Camelina 
plant oil was used. This NASA 
study concluded that the 
use of biofuels reduced the 
amount of pollution. 


366
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
Q16. (a)  Scientists have described solar energy as the ultimate energy source. 
Identify energy sources which derive from photosynthesis.
(b) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the use of biomass as a fuel.
Q17. (a) State the chemical equation for the photosynthesis of glucose.
(b) Identify the molecule needed by plants to photosynthesize.
(c) Glucose can be converted to ethanol, which can be used as a fuel. 
State the name and equation of the process and describe the 
conditions needed.
Q18. (a) When biomass decomposes in the absence of oxygen, biogas is formed. 
Name the main gas present in biogas.
(b) When wood is burnt in an enclosed space, the combustion produces 
harmful pollutants. Identify the pollutants.
(c) Suggest why biomass is likely to become more important in the future 
as a fuel.
Exercise
Reactivity 1.3.5 – Fuel cells
Reactivity 1.3.5 – A fuel cell can be used to convert chemical energy from a fuel 
directly to electrical energy.
Deduce half-equations for the electrode reactions in a fuel cell.
Hydrogen and methanol should be covered as 
fuels for fuel cells.
The use of proton exchange membranes will 
not be assessed.
Reactivity 3.2 – What are the main differences 
between a fuel cell and a primary (voltaic) 
cell?
The hydrogen fuel cell
As we have seen, hydrogen is a possible alternative fuel to fossil fuels as it does not 
produce carbon dioxide. One mole of hydrogen can release 286 kJ of heat energy 
when it combines directly with oxygen:
H2(g) +  1_
2 O2(g) → H2O(l) 
 
 
∆H⊖ = –286 kJ mol–1
As this is a redox reaction that involves the transfer of electrons from hydrogen 
to oxygen, it can be used to produce an electric current directly if the reactants 
are physically separated. This is the basis of a fuel cell, where the reactants are 
continuously supplied to different electrodes. The hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell 
operates with either an acidic or alkaline electrolyte.
The hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell with an alkaline electrolyte
The most commonly used hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell has an alkaline electrolyte 
(Figure 5).


367
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
positive
electrode
(cathode)
KOH(aq)
H2O(l)
negative
electrode
(anode)
H2(g)
OH2
e2
O2(g)
The balanced equation can be deduced from changes in oxidation states as discussed 
in Reactivity 3.2.
Worked example 
Deduce the two half-reactions that occur at the anode and the cathode in the 
hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell with aqueous sodium hydroxide as the electrolyte.
Solution
H2(g) is oxidized at the anode. Start with a simpliﬁ ed equation and the oxidation 
state of the hydrogen in the reactant and product showing the oxidation states in 
blue as in Structure 3.2 and Reactivity 3.2.
H2(g) + _ → H2O(l) + _ 
2(0) 
2(+1) 
oxidation state
2 electrons are produced as both Hs are oxidized: 0 →+1
H2(g) + → H2O(l) + 2e−
As the conditions are alkaline, add 2OH− on the left to balance the negative charges.
Balance the Hs and Os by adding another H2O on the right-hand side.
H2(g) + 2OH−(aq) → 2H2O(l) + 2e−
O2(g) is reduced at the cathode. Start with a simpliﬁ ed equation and the oxidation 
state of the oxygen in the reactant and product.
O2(g) + _ → 2H2O(l) + _
2(0) 
2(−2) 
oxidation state
4 electrons are needed as both Os are reduced: 0 →−2
O2(g) + 4e−→ 2H2O(l) + _
As the conditions are alkaline, add 4OH− on the right to balance the negative charges.
Balance the Hs and Os by adding another 4H2O on the left-hand side and simplify.
O2(g) + 4e− + 4H2O → 2H2O(l) + 4OH−
O2(g) + 4e− + 2H2O → 4OH−(aq)
R1.3 Figure 5 The 
hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell 
with an alkaline electrolyte.


368
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
The overall reaction is the sum of the oxidation and reduction half-reactions:
2H2(g) + 4OH–(aq) + 2H2O(l) + O2(g) + 4e– → 4H2O(l) + 4e– + 4OH–(aq)
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l)
The fuel cell will function as long as hydrogen and oxygen are supplied. The electrodes 
are often made of porous carbon with added transition metals such as nickel. The 
potassium hydroxide provides the hydroxide ions that are transferred across the cell.
The equations for the hydrogen fuel cell under acid conditions are discussed in 
Reactivity 3.2.
One of the problems with the hydrogen fuel cell is that hydrogen gas is almost 
never found as the element in nature and needs to be extracted from other sources. 
Hydrocarbons, including fossil fuels and biomass (waste organic matter), for example, 
can be processed to break down into hydrogen and carbon dioxide. The alternative is 
to electrolyze water, but this of course needs electricity and then only becomes a way 
of storing energy at times of low demand.
For the whole process to be environmentally clean, the hydrogen should be generated 
using renewable resources such as wind power.
Challenge yourself
7. Explain the increased efficiency of a hydrogen−oxygen fuel cell which produces 
steam compared with a cell that produces water. 
Methanol is oxidized using catalysts in the 
methanol fuel cell
Methanol is an alternative fuel used in fuel cells. Methanol is a stable liquid at normal 
environmental conditions, has a high energy density, and is easy to transport. In the 
direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), the fuel is oxidized under acidic conditions on a 
catalyst surface to form carbon dioxide. The H+ ions formed are transported across 
a proton exchange membrane from the anode to the cathode where they react with 
oxygen to produce water, and electrons are transported through an external circuit 
from the anode to the cathode. Water is consumed at the anode and is produced at 
the cathode.
Worked example 
Deduce the two half-reactions that occur at the anode and the cathode in the 
methanol–oxygen fuel cell with an acidic electrolyte.
Solution
CH3OH(g) is oxidized to carbon dioxide at the anode. Start with a simpliﬁ ed 
equation and the oxidation state of the carbon in the reactant and product.
CH3OH(g) + _ → CO2(g) + _
(−2) 
(+4) 
oxidation state
Preparing a simple 
fuel cell: electrolysis 
of water. Full details 
of how to carry out 
this experiment with a 
worksheet are available 
in the eBook.


369
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
6 electrons are produced as C is oxidized: −2 →+4
CH3OH(g) + _ → CO2(g) + 6e−
As the conditions are acidic, add 6H+ on the right to balance the charges.
Balance the Hs and Os by adding another H2O on the left-hand side.
CH3OH(g) + H2O(l) → CO2(g) + 6e− + 6H+
As in the hydrogen fuel cell, O2(g) is reduced at the cathode.
O2(g) + 4e−→ 2H2O(l)
As the conditions are acidic, add 4H + on the left-hand side to balance the charges.
O2(g) + 4e− + 4H+ → 2H2O(l)
The overall equation for the methanol fuel cell can be obtained by balancing the 
number of electrons in the two half-reactions:
CH3OH(g) + H2O(l) → CO2(g) + 6e– + 6H+(aq)
3_
2 O2(g) + 6e– + 6H+(aq) → 3H2O(l)
CH3OH(g) +  3_
2 O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(l)
Microbial fuel cells (MFC) may one day offer a cheap and renewable source of energy. 
They can be used to harness the energy produced from the microbial oxidation of a huge 
range of organic substances. Bacteria are very small organisms which oxidize many organic 
compounds into CO2 and H2O with the production of energy. Some of this energy is needed 
by the organisms to grow and maintain their metabolism, but the rest can be harvested 
and used to generate electricity. Microbial fuel cells offer many potential advantages over 
hydrogen fuel cells. For example, hydrogen fuel cells require a very pure source of a highly 
explosive gas that is difficult to store and distribute. Furthermore, hydrogen is generally 
derived mainly from fossil fuels rather than renewable sources. In contrast, the energy sources 
for microbial fuel cells are renewable organics, including some that are, literally, ‘dirt cheap’. 
The details of the microbial fuel cell will not be assessed in this course.
Researcher holding a two-
chambered microbial fuel 
cell filled with a solution of 
organic acids. Microbial fuel 
cells may one day offer a 
cheap and renewable source 
of energy. 


370
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
The main difference between a fuel cell and a primary (voltaic) cell is that fuel cells do 
not run out. The fuel is supplied continuously to the cell as it is oxidized. 
The chemicals are contained within a primary cell and so it stops working when the 
redox reaction which generates the current is complete.
The advantages and disadvantages of different cells are summarized in Reactivity 3.2.
Q19. One type of fuel cell uses hydrogen as the fuel under acid conditions with a 
proton exchange membrane. The overall equation for the process is:
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l)
(a) State the two half-equations for the reactions involving each reactant.
(b) Hydrogen is a more expensive source of chemical energy than gasoline. 
Explain why fuel cells are considered to be more economical than 
gasoline engines.
Exercise
What are the challenges of using chemical energy to address our 
energy needs?
Guiding Question revisited
In this chapter we have explored how potential energy released during combustion 
as heat can address our energy needs. We have also explored how it can generate 
electrical energy directly:
• Combustion is a reaction in which an element or compound burns in oxygen.
• Fossil fuels originate from living organisms that died millions of years ago. 
They include coal, crude oil or petroleum, and natural gas.
• Coal is a black rock that is mainly carbon.
• Natural gas is mainly methane, and is the cleanest of the fossil fuels.
• Crude oil (petroleum) is a black liquid mixture of mainly hydrocarbons.
• The different hydrocarbons in crude oil can be separated by fractional 
distillation. Longer chain molecules have stronger intermolecular dispersion 
forces and higher boiling points.
• Petrol (gasoline) is separated from crude oil by fractional distillation and is a 
mixture of hydrocarbons with between five and twelve carbon atoms.
• Complete combustion of hydrocarbons breaks the carbon chain and produces 
carbon dioxide and water. Carbon monoxide and carbon in the form of soot are 
formed during incomplete combustion.
• Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas as it absorbs infrared radiation. 
Its large-scale production due to the combustion of fossil fuels has led to global 
warming.
• Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas that binds to haemoglobin. This limits the 
ability of the blood to transport oxygen around the body.
Reactivity 3.2 – What 
are the main diﬀ erences 
between a fuel cell and 
a primary (voltaic) cell?


371
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
• Most of our energy comes from the Sun. Photosynthesis is an endothermic 
reaction that stores solar energy as chemical energy.
• Plants can be grown specifically for use as fuels. Burning biomass can also 
involve burning paper or other waste organic matter.
• Fuel cells generate electricity directly by reacting a fuel such as hydrogen or 
methanol with oxygen in an electrochemical cell.
• Fuels are evaluated according to several criteria including energy density, 
specific energy or the environmental and economic impact of their use.
Practice questions
1. It is now widely accepted that the increased production of carbon dioxide is 
leading to global warming.
(a) Describe how carbon dioxide acts as a greenhouse gas. 
(2)
(b) Outline why oxygen and nitrogen, which are more abundant in 
the air, are not greenhouse gases. 
(1)
(c) Identify two pollutants, other than carbon dioxide, that are produced 
in the combustion engines of cars and outline their polluting effect. 
(2)
(Total 5 marks)
2. (a) Most of the world’s energy comes from fossil fuels. State two 
reasons for this. 
(2)
(b) The ‘speciﬁ c energy’ is the energy produced per unit mass. 
Identify a fuel which has a higher speciﬁ c energy than fossil fuels. 
(1)
 
(Total 3 marks)
3. (a) Determine the percentage of carbon by mass in the fuels, coal (CH), 
petrol (C8H18) and natural gas (CH4). 
(3)
(b) Suggest two reasons why coal has been replaced by petrol and 
natural gas in many countries. 
(2)
(c) One fuel that has been proposed as a replacement for carbon-containing 
substances is hydrogen. State two advantages of using hydrogen 
as a fuel. 
(2)
(Total 7 marks)
4. The enthalpies of combustion of propane and butane are given in 
Section 14 of the data booklet.
(a) Calculate the heat produced by the combustion of 1 g of C3H8
and C4H10 in kJ g–1. 
(2)
(b) Use the ideal gas equation to calculate the density of the two gases 
at STP and hence calculate the heat produced when 1 cm3 of the two 
gases are burnt. 
(3)
 
(Total 5 marks)


372
REACTIVITY 1
Classification of matter
5. (a) State the name of the process by which green plants capture the Sun’s 
energy and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose. 
(1)
(b) State the overall equation for the full redox reaction. 
(1)
(c) Glucose can be converted into ethanol, which can be used in fuel cells. 
Identify this process by name and write the equation for the chemical 
reaction. 
(2)
 
(Total 4 marks)
6. (a) Use Section 14 of the data booklet to calculate the speciﬁ c energy 
(the energy produced when 1 g of fuel is burnt in excess oxygen) of 
methane and methanol. 
(2)
(b) Deduce the average oxidation number of carbon in the two 
compounds.  
(1)
(c) Suggest a possible relationship between the oxidation number 
and speciﬁ c energy. 
(1)
(d) Calculate the speciﬁ c energy of glucose and discuss the validity 
of your hypothesis in part (c). 
(3)
 
(Total 7 marks)
7. Fuel cells may be twice as efﬁ cient as the internal combustion engine. 
Although fuel cells are not yet in widespread use, NASA has used a 
basic hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell as the energy source for space vehicles.
 
Deduce the half-equations occurring at each electrode in the 
hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell in an alkaline medium. 
(2)
(Total 2 marks)
8. (a) One method of comparing fuels is by considering their speciﬁ c energies.
  
Calculate the speciﬁ c energy of octane, C8H18, in kJ kg–1 using 
Sections 7 and 14 of the data booklet. 
(2)
(b) A typical wood has a speciﬁ c energy of 17 × 103 kJ kg–1. Comment on the 
usefulness of octane and wood for powering a moving vehicle, using your 
answer to part (a).
  
If you did not work out an answer for part (a), use 45 × 103 kJ kg–1, but this 
is not the correct answer. 
(1)
(Total 3 marks)
9. (a) Determine the speciﬁ c energy (heat produced when 1 g is burnt) and energy 
density (heat produced from 1 cm3) of petrol (gasoline), using data from 
Sections 7 and 14 of the data booklet. Assume petrol is pure octane, 
C8H18. Octane: molar mass = 114.26 g mol−1; density = 0.703 g cm−3. 
(2) 
(b) Outline why the energy available from an engine will be less than 
these theoretical values. 
(1)
 
(Total 3 marks)


373
REACTIVITY 1.3
Energy from fuels
10. (a) Identify the major constituent of natural gas and write a balanced 
chemical equation for its combustion. 
(2)
(b) Compare natural gas with other fossil fuels as a source of air pollution for 
a given amount of energy and account for any differences. 
(3)
(c) Compare the relative supplies of natural gas and other fossil fuels. 
(1)
(Total 6 marks)


How much, how fast and 
how far?
2
REACTIVITY


