403
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
The rate, or kinetics, of a chemical reaction refers to the speed at which reactants are 
converted into products during a chemical process. We will all have some familiarity 
with this concept in everyday life. Imagine, for example, you are cooking in the 
kitchen. As you drop an egg into hot oil in the pan, it immediately changes to a white 
solid; meanwhile, a container of milk that was left out of the refrigerator is slowly 
turning sour. We observe a similarly wide variation in the rate of reactions that we 
study in the laboratory, and these data can be very useful.
Studies of rates of reaction are of prime importance in industry because they give 
information on how quickly products form and on the conditions that give the most 
efficient and economic yield. They can also be useful in situations where we want to 
slow reactions down – for example, the reactions that cause the destruction of ozone 
in the stratosphere, or the reactions where pollutants in the air combine to produce 
smog. At other times, it is important to know for how long a certain reaction will 
continue – for example, the radioactive effect from radioactive waste. 
This chapter begins with a study of reaction rates and a consideration of how these 
are measured in different cases. Through the explanation of collision theory, we will 
come to understand why different factors affect the rate of reactions. These factors will 
include pressure, concentration, surface area, temperature and presence of a catalyst..
Reactivity 2.2.1 – Rate of reaction
Reactivity 2.2.1 – The rate of reaction is expressed as the change in concentration of a 
particular reactant or product per unit time.
Determine rates of reaction.
Calculation of reaction rates from tangents 
of graphs of concentration, volume or mass 
against time should be covered.
Tool 1, 3, Inquiry 2 – Concentration changes 
in reactions are not usually measured directly. 
What methods are used to provide data to 
determine the rate of reactions?
Tool 1 – What experiments measuring 
reaction rates might use time as (i) a 
dependent variable or (ii) an independent 
variable?
The launch of the first Bangladeshi geostationary communications and broadcast satellite, 
Bangabandhu-1, on a Falcon 9 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 2018. To produce enough 
thrust to launch a rocket, an extremely high rate of reaction between a fuel (in this case kerosene) 
and an oxidizing agent (liquid oxygen) is required to produce a rapid flow of exhaust gases out of the 
combustion chamber. The ability to control and influence the rate of a chemical reaction is an essential 
feature of all industrial chemical processes.
How can the rate of a reaction be controlled?
Guiding Question


404
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
Rate of reaction is deﬁ ned as the rate of change in 
concentration 
When we are interested in how quickly something happens, the factor that we usually 
measure is time. For example, in a sports race, the competitors are judged by the 
time it takes them to reach the finishing line. However, if we want to compare their 
performance in different races over different distances, we would need to express this 
as a rate – in other words, how they performed per unit time.
Rate takes the reciprocal value of time, so is expressed per unit time or, in SI units, per 
second (symbol = s–1).
rate =  1
____
time  =  1__s   = s–1 
In the study of chemical reactions, we use the concept of rate of reaction to 
describe how quickly a reaction happens. As the reaction proceeds, reactants are 
converted into products, and so the concentration of reactants decreases as the 
concentration of products increases. The graphs in Figures 1 and 2 show sketches of 
typical data from reactions.
time
product
concentration, [P]
time
reactant
concentration, [R]
R2.2 Figure 1 Concentration of product 
R2.2 Figure 2 Concentration of reactant 
against time. 
against time.
The rate of a reaction depends on how quickly the concentration of either reactant or 
product changes with respect to time. It can be defined as follows:
rate of reaction =  
increase in product 
concentration  
 
________________ 
 
time taken 
   or    
decrease in reactant 
concentration  
 
_________________ 
 
time taken 
 
Using ∆ to represent ‘change in’, [R] for concentration of reactant, and [P] for 
concentration of product, we can express this as:
rate of reaction =  ∆[P]
____
∆t  or −  ∆[R]
____
∆t  
It is worth noting that, by convention, rate should be expressed as a positive value. For 
this reason, a negative sign has been placed in front of the reactant expression which 
would otherwise produce a negative value due to [R] decreasing over time.
As rate = change in concentration per time, its units are moldm–3s–1.
Note that because 
time and rate are 
reciprocal values, as 
one decreases, the 
other increases. So in 
the example above, the 
racer with the shortest 
time wins the race, 
because they had the 
fastest rate. 
The rate of a 
chemical reaction 
is the increase 
in concentration 
of products, or 
the decrease in 
concentration of 
reactants, per unit 
time.


405
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Figure 3 presents graphs of two different reactions showing the change in 
concentration of reactant against time.
time
A
[R]
B
R2.2 Figure 3 Reactant concentration against time for two different reactions, A and B.
We can see that the concentration of reactants is decreasing more quickly in reaction 
A than in reaction B – the curve is steeper. The steepness, or gradient, of the curve is a 
measure of the change in concentration per unit time, in other words, the rate of the 
reaction.
Because the graphs are curves and not straight lines, the gradient is not constant and 
so can only be given for a particular value of time. We can measure this by drawing 
a tangent to the curve at the specified time point and measuring its gradient. This is 
shown in Figure 4 for the time at 120 s. Note that the gradient of this graph is negative 
as the reactant concentration is decreasing, but rate is expressed as a positive value.
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300
0
time/s
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
2.20
2.40
2.60
2.80
3.00
3.20
3.40
3.60
[R]/mol dm23
tangent to the curve at 120 s
gives reaction rate at 120 s
22.40 mol dm23 
283 s
5 28.48 3 1023 mol dm23 s21
5
R2.2 Figure 4 Measuring the gradient of the tangent to the curve at time t = 120 s. 
The measured rate of the reaction is 8.48 × 10–3 mol dm–3 s–1 at this time. Note that, by convention, rate 
is always expressed as a positive value.


406
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
The shape of the curve indicates that the rate of the reaction is not constant during 
the reaction, but is greatest at the start and slows down as the reaction proceeds. This 
is illustrated in Figure 5, which shows the calculation of reaction rate at two different 
times during a reaction.
t = 0 s; rate = 2.9 × 10–2 mol dm–3 s–1
t = 90 s; rate = 7.2 × 10–3 mol dm–3 s–1
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170
0
time/s
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
[R]/mol dm23
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1.90
2.00
tangent to the curve at 0 s
gives initial rate
 21.92 mol dm23 
67 s
5 22.9 3 1022 mol dm23 s21
5
tangent to the curve at 90 s
gives reaction rate at 90 s
 21.18 
164
5 27.2 3 1023 mol dm23 s21
5
R2.2 Figure 5 Measuring the gradient of the tangent to the curve at two different times during a 
reaction. The rate decreases as the reaction proceeds.
The rate is greatest at the start because this is when the reactant concentration 
is highest. The effect of concentration on reaction rate is discussed later in this 
chapter. Because of this variation in rate as a reaction proceeds, in order to compare 
the rates of reactions under different conditions, it is common to compare the 
initial rate of each reaction by taking the tangent to the curve at t = 0. As we will 
see later in this chapter, initial rate data are very useful in analyzing the effect of 
concentration on rate.
The rate of a reaction is not constant during a reaction, but is greatest at the start 
and decreases as the reaction proceeds.
You will get a more 
accurate value for the 
slope of the tangent if 
you draw it as long as 
you reasonably can, 
so that the ‘y’ value 
(concentration) and the 
‘x’ value (time) are as 
large as possible.
Note the difference 
between the two 
instructions ‘draw a 
graph’ and ‘sketch 
a graph’. Drawing is 
based on actual data so 
scales must be chosen 
appropriately and data 
points and units clearly 
marked; sketching is a 
way of showing a trend 
in the variables, without 
reference to specific 
data. Note that in both 
cases, the axes must 
be clearly labelled with 
the dependent variable 
on the y-axis and the 
independent variable 
on the x-axis.


407
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Measuring rates of reaction uses different techniques 
depending on the reaction 
Choosing whether to measure the change in concentration of reactants or 
products, and the technique with which to measure that change, really depends 
on what is the most convenient for a particular reaction. This is different for 
different reactions. In most cases the concentration is not measured directly, but 
is measured by means of a signal that is related to the changing concentration. If, 
for example, a reaction forms a coloured precipitate as a product, the change in 
colour could be measured. If a reaction gives off a gas, then the change in volume 
or change in mass could be measured. The raw data collected using these ‘signals’ 
will be in a variety of units, rather than as concentrations measured in mol dm–3
directly. This is generally not a problem, as it still enables us to determine the rate 
of the reaction. Many of the experiments used here can be carried out using data-
logging devices. Some examples of common techniques in relation to specific 
reactions are discussed below.
Nature of Science
Although the chemical reactions between individual molecules cannot be 
observed directly, there are many indirect methods for investigating these 
processes in order to develop explanations for what is happening. As with all 
of chemistry, the validity of these theories is dependent on the extent to which 
they are supported by experimental data and their ability to make accurate 
predictions.
Note that the balanced 
equation of a reaction 
gives us no information 
about its rate. We can 
obtain this information 
only from experimental 
(empirical) data. Is 
there a fundamental 
difference between 
knowledge claims 
based on conclusions 
from theoretical data 
and those based on 
experimental data?
Change in volume of gas produced 
This is a convenient method if one of the products is a gas. Collecting the gas and 
measuring the change in volume at regular time intervals enables a graph to be plotted 
of volume against time. A gas syringe can be used for this purpose. It consists of 
a ground glass barrel and plunger. The plunger moves outwards as the gas collects 
and the barrel is calibrated to record the volume directly. Alternatively, the gas can 
be collected by displacement of water from an inverted burette. Note though that the 
displacement method can only be used if the gas collected has low solubility in water. 
Data loggers are also available for continuous monitoring of volume change against 
time. The rate of reaction of a metal with dilute acid to release hydrogen gas can be 
followed in this way.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
Challenge yourself
1. Most gases are less soluble in warm water than in cold water, so using 
warm water may help to reduce a source of error when collecting a gas by 
displacement of water. But what new error might this create?
Tool 1, 3, Inquiry 2 – 
Concentration changes 
in reactions are not 
usually measured 
directly. What methods 
are used to provide data 
to determine the rate of 
reactions?


408
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
gas syringe
reactants
thermostated
water bath
stopper
reactants
water
inverted
burette
TIME
MIN
SEC
time
volume of gas
Change in mass 
Many reactions involve a change in mass, and it may be convenient to measure this 
directly. If the reaction is giving off a gas, the corresponding decrease in mass can 
be measured by standing the reaction mixture directly on a balance. This method 
is unlikely to work well where the evolved gas is hydrogen, as it is too light to give 
significant changes in mass. The method allows for continuous readings, so a graph 
can be plotted directly of mass against time. For example, the release of carbon 
dioxide from the reaction between a carbonate and dilute acid can be followed in 
this way.
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
reactants
e.g. CaCO3 1 HCl
cotton wool to prevent
escape of liquid 
and solid
digital
balance
time
mass
When you take a 
glass of cold water 
from the refrigerator 
and leave it by your 
bed overnight, you 
may notice bubbles 
of gas have formed 
by morning. This is 
because the gas (mostly 
dissolved oxygen) has 
become less soluble as 
the temperature of the 
water has increased.
Experiments to measure 
rate of reaction by following 
change in volume against 
time.
Volume of gas against time. 
The reaction has ended when 
the curve reaches a plateau.
Experiment to measure rate 
of reaction by following 
change in mass against time.
Mass against time. 
The reaction has ended when 
the curve reaches a plateau.


409
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Change in transmission of light: colorimetry/spectrophotometry 
This technique can be used if one of the reactants or products is coloured and so 
gives characteristic absorption in the visible region (wavelengths about 320–800 nm). 
Sometimes an indicator can be added to generate a coloured compound that can then 
be followed in the reaction. A colorimeter or spectrophotometer works by passing 
light of a selected wavelength through the solution being studied and measuring the 
intensity of the light transmitted by the reaction components. As the concentration 
of the coloured compound increases, it absorbs proportionally more light, so less is 
transmitted. A photocell generates an electric current according to the amount of light 
transmitted and this is recorded on a meter or connected to a computer.
CCD (charge-coupled 
device) detector
solution 
in cuvette
diffraction
grating
absorption
light source
speciﬁc 
wavelength 
selected
The method allows for continuous readings to be made, so a graph of absorbance 
against time can be plotted directly. It is possible to convert the absorbance values into 
concentrations using a standard curve based on readings of known concentration. 
Often, however, it is sufficient to record absorbance itself (or transmittance, which is 
inversely proportional to absorbance) as a function against time.
For example, the reaction between the dye crystal violet and sodium hydroxide 
solution can be written in an abbreviated form as follows:
CV+ + OH– → CVOH
The initial crystal violet solution (CV+) is coloured but this slowly changes to a 
colourless solution as the product (CVOH) is formed. So we can determine the rate of 
product formation by measuring the decrease in absorbance that occurs as the coloured 
reactant is depleted. The figure shows data from this reaction, with absorbance at 
591 nm measured against time.
A spectrophotometer 
measures absorbance, 
which directly relates to 
concentration. Light of 
a specific wavelength is 
selected from an internal 
source and passed through 
the solution placed in the 
cuvette. The transmitted light 
passes through a diffraction 
grating, then the diffracted 
light is collected and changed 
into a digital signal by the 
charge-coupled device (CCD) 
detector.
Results of an experiment 
to determine the rate 
of reaction by following 
change in absorbance 
against time using a digital 
spectrophotometer.


410
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
An example of the use of a calibration curve to determine concentration from 
absorbance data is outlined in Structure 3.1.
Change in concentration measured using titration 
In some reactions it may be possible to measure the concentration of one of the 
reactants or products by titrating it against a known ‘standard’ (see Structure 1.4). 
However, because this technique involves chemically changing the reaction mixture, 
it cannot be done continuously as the reaction proceeds. Instead, samples must be 
withdrawn from the reaction mixture at regular time intervals and then analyzed by 
titration. A problem here is that the process of titration takes time, during which the 
reaction mixture in the sample will continue to react. To overcome this, a technique 
known as quenching can be used, where a substance is introduced which effectively 
stops the reaction in the sample at the moment it is withdrawn. It is rather like 
obtaining a ‘freeze frame’ shot of the reaction at a particular interval of time. In order 
to see how concentration changes as the reaction proceeds, it is necessary to repeat 
this process at several intervals of time.
For example, the reaction between H2O2 and acidified KI yields I2, which can be 
titrated against sodium thiosulfate, Na2S2O3, to determine its concentration. Sodium 
carbonate, Na2CO3, is used to quench the reaction by neutralizing the added acid.
H2O2(aq) + 2H+(aq) + 2I–(aq) → I2(aq) + 2H2O(l)
Change in concentration measured using conductivity
The total electrical conductivity of a solution depends on the total concentration of its 
ions and on their charges. If this changes when reactants are converted to products, it 
can provide a convenient method to follow the progress of the reaction. Conductivity 
can be measured directly using a conductivity meter which involves immersing inert 
electrodes in the solution. As with colorimetry, the apparatus can be calibrated using 
solutions of known concentration so that the readings can be converted into the 
concentrations of the ions present.
For example, in the reaction:
BrO3–(aq) + 5Br–(aq) + 6H+(aq) → 3Br2(aq) + 3H2O(l)
the sharp decrease in the concentration of ions (12 on the reactants side and 0 on the 
products side) will give a corresponding decrease in the electrical conductivity of the 
solution as the reaction proceeds.
Non-continuous methods of detecting change during a reaction: 
‘clock reactions’
Sometimes it is difficult to record the continuous change in the rate of a reaction. In 
these cases, it may be more convenient to measure the time it takes for a reaction to 
reach a certain chosen fixed point – that is, something observable which can be used 
as an arbitrary ‘end point’ by which to stop the clock. The time taken to reach this 
point for the same reaction under different conditions can then be compared and 
used as a means of judging the different rates of the reaction. So in contrast to the first 
five techniques of measuring rate of reaction where time is the independent variable, 
detecting a change in a clock reaction uses time as a dependent variable.
Tool 1 – What 
experiments measuring 
reaction rates might use 
time as (i) a dependent 
variable or (ii) an 
independent variable?


411
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Note that the limitation of this method is that the data obtained give only an average 
rate over the time interval.
For example, the following can be measured:
• the time taken for a certain size piece of magnesium ribbon to react completely 
with dilute acid, until it is no longer visible
Mg(s) + 2HCl (aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
• the time taken for a solution of sodium thiosulfate titrated with dilute acid to 
become opaque by the precipitation of sulfur, so that a cross viewed through 
paper is no longer visible
Na2S2O3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + SO2(aq) + H2O(l) + S(s)
Exercise
Q1. Consider the following reaction.
2MnO4–(aq) + 5C2O42–(aq) + 16H+(aq) → 2Mn2+(aq) + 10CO2(g) + 8H2O(l)
Describe three different ways in which you could measure the rate of this 
reaction.
Q2. Which units are used to express the rate of a reaction?
A 
mol dm–3 time 
B 
mol–1 dm3 time–1
C 
mol dm–3 time–1 
D 
mol time–1
Q3. The reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid is carried 
out in an open ﬂ ask. Measurements are made to determine the rate of 
the reaction.
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + H2O(l) + CO2(g)
(a) Suggest three different types of data that could be collected to measure 
the rate of this reaction.
(b) Explain how you would expect the rate of the reaction to change with 
time and why.
Investigating rates of 
reaction. Full details 
of how to carry out 
this experiment with a 
worksheet are available 
in the eBook.
Recording the increase 
in opaqueness during a 
reaction. Sodium thiosulfate 
(left) is a clear liquid, which 
reacts with hydrochloric 
acid (upper centre) to form 
an opaque solution (right). 
A cross (left) drawn onto 
paper is placed under the 
reaction beaker to allow the 
end point to be confirmed. 
The experiment is timed from 
when the reactants are mixed 
until the cross disappears 
from sight.
In all these reactions, 
the goal is to 
measure change in 
concentration against 
time. This allows a 
comparison of reaction 
rates under different 
conditions. But because 
the rate is dependent 
on temperature, it is 
essential to control 
the temperature 
throughout these 
experiments. It is 
sometimes suitable to 
carry out the reactions 
in a thermostatically 
controlled water bath.


412
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
Q4. The following data were collected for the reaction 
2H2O2(aq) → 2H2O(l) + O2(g) at 390 °C.
[H2O2] / mol dm–3
Time / s
[H2O2] / mol dm–3
Time / s
0.200
0
0.070
120
0.153
20
0.063
140
0.124
40
0.058
160
0.104
60
0.053
180
0.090
80
0.049
200
0.079
100
Draw a graph of concentration against time and determine the reaction rate 
after 60 s and after 120 s.
Reactivity 2.2.2 – Collision theory
Reactivity 2.2.2 – Species react as a result of collisions of sufﬁ cient energy and proper 
orientation.
Explain the relationship between the kinetic energy of the particles and the temperature in 
kelvin, and the role of collision geometry.
Structure 1.1 – What is the relationship 
between the kinetic molecular theory and 
collision theory?
Species react as a result of collisions 
Kinetic energy and temperature 
Since the early 18th century, scientists have developed theories to explain the fact that 
gases exert a pressure. These theories developed alongside a growing understanding 
of the atomic and molecular nature of matter, and were extended to include the 
behaviour of particles in all states of matter. Today they are summarized as the kinetic 
molecular theory of matter (see Structure 1.1).
The essence of the kinetic molecular theory is that particles in a substance move 
randomly as a result of the kinetic energy that they possess. Because of the random 
nature of these movements and collisions, not all particles in a substance at any one 
time have the same values of kinetic energy, but will instead have a range of values. A 
convenient way to describe the kinetic energy of a substance is therefore to take the 
average of these values, and this is directly related to its absolute temperature – that is, 
its temperature measured in kelvin.
Increasing temperature therefore means an increase in the average kinetic energy of 
the particles of a substance. As we supply a substance with extra energy by heating it, 
we raise the average kinetic energy of the particles and so also raise its temperature. 
When we compare the behaviour of the particles in the three states of matter from 
solid, through liquid, to gas, the differences are a result of this increase in the average 
kinetic energy of the particles.
Modelling rate of 
reaction: collisions  in 
the court. Full details 
of how to carry out 
this activity with a 
worksheet are available 
in the eBook.
The Kelvin scale of 
temperature gives a 
natural measure of 
the average kinetic 
energy of molecules 
in a gas, whereas the 
Celsius scale is based 
on the properties of 
water. Are physical 
properties such as 
temperature invented 
or discovered?
A puddle of water 
evaporates, even on a 
cold day, because a small 
proportion of molecules on 
the surface have enough 
kinetic energy to vaporize. 
This demonstrates that the 
particles in a substance must 
have a range of values of 
kinetic energy as described 
by kinetic molecular theory.


413
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
For a given substance this can be summarized as follows:
Solid
Liquid
increasing kinetic energy
increasing temperature
Gas
The Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution curve 
The fact that particles in a gas at a specific temperature show a range in their values of 
kinetic energy is expressed by the Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution curve.
number of particles with
kinetic energy, E
kinetic energy, E
Like other distribution curves, this shows the number of particles having a specific 
value of kinetic energy (or the probability of that value occurring) plotted against the 
values for kinetic energy. The area under the curve represents the total number of 
particles in the sample.
The nature of collisions between particles 
When reactants are placed together, the kinetic energy that their particles possess 
causes them to collide with each other. The energy of these collisions may result in 
some bonds within the reactants being broken, and some new bonds forming. As 
a result, products form and the reaction ‘happens’. This explanation of chemical 
reactions is known as collision theory.
A
B
C
C
B
A
A
B
C
It follows that the rate of the reaction will depend on the number of collisions between 
particles that are ‘successful’, that is, which lead to the formation of products. But a 
very important point is that not all collisions will be successful. There are two main factors 
that influence this:
• energy of collision and
• geometry of collision.
Temperature 
in kelvin (K) is 
proportional 
to the average 
kinetic energy of 
the particles in a 
substance.
The Maxwell–Boltzmann 
energy distribution curve.
Although their 
names are linked in 
the famous energy 
distribution curve 
discussed here, James 
Clerk Maxwell and 
Ludwig Boltzmann had 
very different outlooks 
on life. Maxwell was 
a Scottish physicist, 
known for his curiosity 
and humour. His wife 
worked alongside 
him in many of 
his experiments. 
Boltzmann, an 
Austrian, was prone 
to depression and 
took his own life, 
seemingly believing 
that his work was not 
valued. Nonetheless, 
as peers during the 
19th century, they 
reﬁ ned and developed 
each other’s ideas, 
culminating in the 
distribution curve that 
bears their two names.
Particles react by colliding 
with sufficient kinetic energy 
and in the correct orientation.


414
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
Energy of collision
In order for a collision to lead to a reaction, the particles must have a certain minimum 
value for their kinetic energy, known as the activation energy, Ea. This energy is 
necessary for overcoming repulsion between molecules, and often for breaking 
some bonds in the reactants before they can react. When this energy is supplied, the 
reactants achieve the transition state from which products can form. The activation 
energy therefore represents an energy barrier for the reaction, and it has a different 
value in different reactions.
products
reactants
 potential energy
reaction
coordinate
Ea
DH
DH
products
reactants
 potential energy
reaction
coordinate
endothermic
exothermic
(a)
(b)
Ea
We can think of the activation energy as a ‘threshold value’ – a bit like a pass mark 
in an examination: values greater than this mark achieve a pass, lower values do not 
achieve a pass. The activation energy threshold similarly determines which particles 
react and which do not. So only particles that have a kinetic energy value greater than 
the activation energy will have successful collisions. Note that particles with lower 
values of kinetic energy may still collide, but these collisions will not be ‘successful’ in 
the sense of causing a reaction.
It therefore follows that the rate of the reaction depends on the proportion of particles 
that have values for kinetic energy greater than the activation energy.
activation energy, Ea
The blue area shows the
proportion of particles
in the sample that have
enough energy to react.
The white area shows the proportion of
particles in the sample that do not have
enough energy to react.
number of particles with
kinetic energy, E
kinetic energy, E
The magnitude of the activation energy varies greatly from one reaction to another, 
and it is an important factor in determining the overall rate of the reaction. In general, 
reactions with high activation energy proceed more slowly than those with low 
activation energy as fewer particles will have the required energy for a successful 
collision. 
Energy path of a reaction 
with the activation energy 
for (a) endothermic and (b)
exothermic reactions.
 represents the 
transition state
Activation energy 
(Ea) is defined as the 
minimum value of 
kinetic energy that 
particles must have 
before they are able 
to react. 
Maxwell–Boltzmann energy 
distribution curve showing 
how the activation energy, 
Ea, distinguishes between 
particles that have greater or 
lesser values of the kinetic 
energy required to react.


415
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Geometry of collision 
Because collisions between particles are random, they are likely to occur with the 
particles in many different orientations. In some reactions, this can be crucial in 
determining whether or not the collisions will be successful, and therefore what 
proportion of collisions will lead to a reaction.
reactant molecules
approach each other
reactant molecules
approach each other
(a)
(b)
ineffective collision –  
no reaction occurs
effective collision –
particles have correct
collision geometry so
reaction occurs
product molecules
formed
reactant molecules
separate – no product
formed
We can now summarize the collision theory as follows. The rate of a reaction depends 
on the frequency of collisions that occur between particles possessing both:
• values of kinetic energy greater than the activation energy and
• appropriate collision geometry.
Understanding this theory will help us to investigate and explain the factors that 
increase the rate of reaction.
Nature of Science
The collision between a small number of reacting species resulting in chemical 
change has not been observed directly. Instead, collision theory is based 
on an application of kinetic molecular theory and theory of how chemical 
reactions occur through bond-breaking and bond-making. In science, theories 
generally accommodate the assumptions and premises of other theories in 
this way. The fact that collision theory helps to explain the observed effects of 
factors influencing the rate of reactions adds to its validity. The theory enables 
chemists to make predictions about the impact of different factors on the rates 
of specific reactions, which has important applications in many branches of 
chemistry such as industry, biochemistry and environmental chemistry.
Exercise
Q5. Which statement is correct for a collision between reactant particles that 
leads to reaction?
A 
Colliding particles must have different energy.
B 
Colliding particles must have the same energy.
C 
Colliding particles must have kinetic energy greater than the average 
kinetic energy.
D 
Colliding particles must have kinetic energy greater than the activation 
energy.
The effect of collision 
geometry. In (a) the particles 
do not have the correct 
collision geometry and no 
reaction occurs. In (b) the 
particles collide with the 
correct geometry, enabling 
products to form.
In order to react, 
particles must collide 
with kinetic energy 
greater than the 
activation energy 
and have the correct 
collision geometry.
Structure 1.1 – What 
is the relationship 
between the kinetic 
molecular theory and 
collision theory?


416
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
Q6. Which of the following determine whether a reaction will occur?
I.
the orientation of the molecules
II. the energy of the molecules
III. the volume of the container
A 
I and II 
B 
I and III 
C 
II only 
D 
I, II and III
Q7. If we compare two reactions, one which requires the simultaneous collision 
of three molecules and the other which requires a collision between two 
molecules, which reaction would you expect to be faster? Explain why.
Reactivity 2.2.3, 2.2.4 and 2.2.5 – Factors that 
inﬂ uence the rate of reaction
Reactivity 2.2.3 – Factors that inﬂ uence the rate of a reaction include pressure, 
concentration, surface area, temperature and the presence of a catalyst.
Predict and explain the effects of changing conditions on the rate of a reaction.
Tool 1 – What variables must be controlled in 
studying the effect of a factor on the rate of a 
reaction?
Nature of Science, Tool 3, Inquiry 3 – How 
can graphs provide evidence of systematic 
and random error?
Reactivity 2.2.4 – Activation energy, Ea, is the minimum energy that colliding 
particles need for a successful collision leading to a reaction.
Construct Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution curves to explain the effect of temperature 
on the probability of successful collisions.
Reactivity 2.2.5 – Catalysts increase the rate of reaction by providing an alternative 
reaction pathway with lower Ea.
Sketch and explain energy proﬁ les with and without catalysts for endothermic and 
exothermic reactions.
Construct Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution curves to explain the effect of different 
values for Ea on the probability of successful collisions.
Biological catalysts are called enzymes.
The different mechanisms of homogeneous and 
heterogeneous catalysts will not be assessed.
Reactivity 2.3 – What is the relative effect 
of a catalyst on the rate of the forward and 
backward reactions?
Temperature, concentration, pressure, surface 
area and the use of a catalyst can inﬂ uence the 
rate of reaction 
From the collision theory, we know that any factor which increases the number of 
successful collisions will increase the rate of the reaction. We will investigate five such 
factors here.
Be careful not to 
confuse the question 
of ‘how fast?’ a reaction 
goes with the question 
of ‘how far?’ it goes. 
We are discussing only 
the first question here. 
The question of how 
far a reaction goes, 
which influences the 
yield of the reaction, 
will be discussed in 
Reactivity 2.3.


417
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Temperature 
Increasing the temperature causes an increase in the average kinetic energy of the 
particles. We can see this by comparing Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution 
curves of the same sample of particles at two different temperatures.
number of particles with
kinetic energy, E
300 K
310 K
kinetic energy, E
The area under the two curves is equal as this represents the total number of particles 
in the sample. But at the higher temperature, more of the particles have higher values 
for kinetic energy and the peak of the curve shifts to the right. In Figure 6, we can see 
how this shift increases the proportion of particles that have values for kinetic energy 
greater than that of the activation energy.
activation energy Ea 
number of particles with
kinetic energy, E
300 K
310 K
number of particles with
energy . Ea at 300 K
kinetic energy, E
number of particles with
energy . Ea at 310 K
So, as temperature increases, there is an increase in collision frequency due to the 
higher kinetic energy, but more importantly, there is an increase in the number 
of collisions involving particles with the necessary activation energy to overcome 
the activation energy barrier. Consequently, there is an increase in the frequency 
of successful collisions and so an increase in the rate of reaction. Many reactions 
approximately double their reaction rate for every 10 °C increase in temperature.
Concentration 
Increasing the concentration of reactants increases the rate of reaction. This is 
because as concentration increases, the frequency of collisions between reactant 
particles increases, as shown in Figure 7. The frequency of successful collisions 
therefore increases too.
Maxwell–Boltzmann 
distribution curves for a 
sample of gas at 300 K 
and 310 K. At the higher 
temperature, the curve has 
shifted to the right and 
become broader, showing 
a larger number of particles 
with higher values for kinetic 
energy.
Specimens of the 
extinct mammal the 
mammoth, dated as 
10 000 years old, have 
been found perfectly 
preserved in the 
Arctic ice, whereas for 
individual specimens of 
a similar age found in 
California, only bones 
remain. This is an 
illustration of the effect 
of the cold temperature 
in the Arctic decreasing 
the rate of the reactions 
of decay. The same 
concept is used in the 
process of refrigerating 
or freezing food to 
preserve it.
R2.2 Figure 6 Maxwell–
Boltzmann energy 
distribution curves for a 
sample of gas at two different 
temperatures, showing the 
higher proportion of particles 
with kinetic energy greater 
than the activation energy at 
the higher temperature.


418
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
low concentration
higher concentration
When particles are closer together
they have a greater chance of colliding.
We can see the effect of concentration by following the rate of a reaction as it 
progresses. As reactants are used up, their concentration falls and the rate of the 
reaction decreases, giving the typical rate curves we saw in Figures 1 and 2.
Pressure 
For reactions involving gases, increasing pressure increases the rate of reaction. 
This is because the higher pressure compresses the gas, effectively increasing its 
concentration. This will increase the frequency of collisions.
low pressure
high pressure
In this example, the pressure has
been increased by decreasing
the size of the container
R2.2 Figure 7 Effect of 
concentration on collision 
frequency.
The effect of concentration 
on the rate of reaction 
between zinc and sulfuric 
acid. The tube on the left 
has a more concentrated 
solution of the acid, the 
tube on the right has a more 
dilute solution. The product, 
hydrogen gas, is seen 
collecting much more quickly 
in the presence of the more 
concentrated acid.
At the same temperature, 
the box on the right has a 
higher pressure and a greater 
collision frequency.


419
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Surface area 
Increasing the surface area of reactants increases the rate of reaction. This is 
important in heterogeneous reactions where the reactants are in different phases, 
such as a solid reacting with a solution. Subdividing a large particle into smaller 
parts increases the total surface area and therefore allows more contact and a higher 
probability of collisions between the reactants. You may know, for example, how 
much easier it is to start a fire using small pieces of wood, rather than a large log – it 
is because with the small pieces there is more contact between the wood and the 
oxygen with which it is reacting. In reactions involving solids in solutions, stirring 
may help to increase the surface area of the solid by ensuring individual particles are 
spread throughout the solution and do not aggregate at the bottom of the container. 
This increases the rate of reaction.
The effect of particle size can be demonstrated in the reaction between marble (CaCO3) 
and hydrochloric acid. When marble chips are replaced with powder, the effervescence 
caused by carbon dioxide release is much more vigorous.
This effect of particle size on reaction rate can be quite dramatic. It has been 
responsible for many industrial accidents involving explosions of flammable dust 
powders – for example, coal dust in mines and flour in mills.
Catalyst 
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction without itself 
undergoing chemical change. Most catalysts work by providing an alternative route for 
the reaction that has a lower activation energy.
 Coal dust explosion 
experiment at Altofts Colliery, 
Yorkshire, UK. Health and 
safety research in the UK 
started with investigations in 
the early 20th century into 
safety in mines. Experiments 
were carried out at locations 
such as Altofts Colliery, 
helping to determine that 
coal dust was explosive under 
certain circumstances.


420
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
uncatalyzed
reaction
activation energy
uncatalyzed reaction
activation energy
catalyzed reaction
DH
products
reactants
reaction coordinate
 potential energy
catalyzed
reaction
This means that without increasing the temperature, a larger number of particles will 
now have values of kinetic energy greater than the activation energy, and so will be 
able to undergo successful collisions. Think again of activation energy as being like the 
pass mark in an examination: the effect of the catalyst is like lowering the pass mark. 
This means that with the same work in the tests, a higher number of people would be 
able to achieve a pass!
Figure 8 uses the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution to show how a catalyst increases 
the proportion of particles having values of kinetic energy greater than the activation 
energy.
Particles with
these low energies
cannot react.
kinetic energy, E
number of particles with
kinetic energy, E
Ea catalyzed
Ea uncatalyzed
number of particles with
energy . Ea catalyzed
number of particles with
energy . Ea uncatalyzed
Catalysts bring about an equal reduction in the activation energy of both the forward 
and the reverse reactions, so they do not change the position of equilibrium or the 
yield (seen in Reactivity 2.3). However, because of their ability to increase the rate of 
reactions, they influence the rate of formation of products and so play an essential 
role in the efficiency of many industrial processes. Without catalysts, many reactions 
would proceed too slowly, or would have to be conducted at such high temperatures 
that they would simply not be worthwhile. This is why the discovery of the ‘best’ 
catalyst for a particular reaction is a very active area of research, and often the exact 
specification of a catalyst used in an industrial process is a matter of secrecy.
Effect of a catalyst on 
lowering the activation 
energy of a reaction.
R2.2 Figure 8 Effect of 
catalyst on increasing the 
proportion of particles able 
to react.
A catalyst is a 
substance that 
increases the rate 
of a chemical 
reaction without 
itself undergoing 
permanent chemical 
change.
Reactivity 2.3 – What 
is the relative eﬀ ect of 
a catalyst on the rate 
of the forward and 
backward reactions?


421
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
A catalytic converter containing transition metal catalysts such as platinum, palladium and rhodium. 
This device catalyzes reactions that convert the toxic emissions from an internal combustion engine 
into less harmful ones. It is estimated that catalytic converters can reduce pollution emissions by 90% 
without loss of engine performance or fuel economy.
Every biological reaction is controlled by a catalyst, known as an enzyme. Thousands of 
different enzymes exist as they are each specific for a particular biochemical reaction. 
Enzymes are finding increasingly widespread uses in many domestic and industrial 
processes, from biological detergents to acting as ‘biosensors’ in medical studies. 
Some of these applications, such as cheese making, are centuries old, but others are 
developing rapidly, constituting the field known as biotechnology.
Catalysis is also an important aspect of Green Chemistry, which seeks to reduce the 
negative impact of chemical processes on the environment. Catalysts can replace 
stoichiometric reagents, and can greatly enhance the selectivity of processes. As they 
are effective in very small quantities and can frequently be reused, catalysts do not 
contribute to the chemical waste, and so they increase the atom economy.
Challenge yourself
2. Catalysts can be categorized as ‘homogeneous’ or ‘heterogeneous’. A 
homogeneous catalyst is in the same phase as the reactants. For example, 
gaseous chlorine radicals catalyze the breakdown of ozone in the stratosphere. 
A heterogeneous catalyst, such as solid vanadium(V) oxide in the reaction 
between gaseous sulfur dioxide and oxygen, is in a different phase to the 
reactants. Can you identify which type of catalyst might be more difficult to 
recover after a reaction and suggest a possible approach for doing so?
Catalytic reforming is 
the process by which 
linear hydrocarbons 
are converted into 
branched or cyclic 
molecules that burn 
more smoothly. The 
development of this 
process is thought 
to have played a 
major role in the 
Second World War. 
Aircraft fuel using 
such hydrocarbons 
increased the 
performance of the 
European allies’ planes 
to the point where 
they were able to gain 
victory in the skies.
Biological catalysts 
are called enzymes.
A microscopic cross-section 
of glands found in the 
stomach. The pepsinogen 
digestive enzyme is shown 
in brown. It is converted 
by gastric acid into the 
active enzyme pepsin which 
catalyzes the breakdown of 
proteins into small units of 
amino acids called peptides.
The effect of a catalyst. 
Full details of how 
to carry out this 
experiment with a 
worksheet are available 
in the eBook.


422
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
Nature of Science
Depletion of the protective ozone layer in the stratosphere has been 
caused largely by the catalytic effects of CFCs and nitrogen oxides. These 
chemicals are produced from a variety of sources and often have their most 
destructive effect far from the country of their origin. International action and 
cooperation have played an important part in reducing the effects of ozone 
depletion, and continuing adherence by all countries to international treaties 
is essential.
Inquiry-based skills for investigating rate of reaction 
Identification of controlled variables 
Given the range of factors that can affect the rate of reaction, we must be careful to 
identify the relevant controlled variables when planning an investigation. For example, 
when investigating the effect of temperature on the reaction between hydrochloric 
acid, HCl(aq), and magnesium, Mg(s), we would need to ensure that the same 
concentration of acid is used in each trial as well as using the same sized magnesium 
strip to control the surface area.
When you are identifying variables to be controlled, it can be helpful to first 
consider the factors that affect rate of reaction, such as concentration, surface area 
and temperature, and then the specific details of your measurement technique. For 
example, when using a light sensor to measure the rate of formation of a precipitate 
in a reaction, you would need to ensure that the position of the sensor and light 
source are the same during all trials. This approach is crucial in obtaining valid data 
from an investigation.
Evidence for systematic and random errors in graphs 
As well as identifying the effect of a given variable on the rate of reaction, graphs can 
also be used to provide evidence of systematic and random errors.
independent
random
dependent
perfect
systematic
In a perfect data set, all data points would be positioned on the trend line. A systematic error produces 
a displaced straight line above or below the expected position. Random errors lead to points on both 
sides of the trend line.
Tool 1 – What variables 
must be controlled in 
studying the eﬀ ect of a 
factor on the rate of a 
reaction?
We can evaluate the 
fit of a trend line or 
curve by applying 
the coefficient of 
determination, R2
(pronounced ‘R
squared’). An R2 value 
will fall between 0 and 
1, where 1 indicates that 
the trend line or curve 
passes perfectly through 
all data points. This 
value can be calculated 
automatically on most 
graph-plotting software.


423
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Systematic errors occur when all measurements are higher, or all measurements are 
lower, than the expected value. This leads to inaccuracy in the final results. Random 
errors occur in individual measurements due to limitations in measurement equipment 
(uncertainty), changes in the surroundings, misinterpreted measurements or an 
insufficient number of repeat trials. These can lead to imprecision in collected data.
Exercise
Q8. 
Which of the following statements is correct?
A 
A catalyst increases the rate of the forward reaction only.
B 
A catalyst increases the rate of the forward and backward reactions.
C 
A catalyst increases the yield of product formed.
D 
A catalyst increases the activation energy of a reaction.
Q9. 
Which statements are correct for the effects of catalyst and temperature on 
the rate of reaction?
Adding a catalyst
Increasing the temperature
A
collision frequency increases
collision frequency increases
B
activation energy decreases
collision frequency increases
C
collision frequency increases
activation energy increases
D
activation energy increases
activation energy decreases
Q10. In the reaction between marble (calcium carbonate) and hydrochloric acid, 
which set of conditions would give the highest rate of reaction?
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl → CaCl2(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
A 
marble chips and 1.0 mol dm–3 HCl
B 
marble powder and 1.0 mol dm–3 HCl
C 
marble chips and 0.1 mol dm–3 HCl
D 
marble powder and 0.1 mol dm–3 HCl
Q11. A sugar cube cannot be ignited with a match, but a sugar cube coated in 
ashes will ignite. Suggest a reason for this observation.
Q12. Catalytic converters are now used in most cars to convert some components 
of exhaust gases into less environmentally damaging molecules. One of 
these reactions converts carbon monoxide and nitrogen monoxide into 
carbon dioxide and nitrogen. The catalyst usually consists of metals such as 
platinum or rhodium.
(a) Write an equation for this reaction.
(b) Explain why it is important to reduce the concentrations of carbon 
monoxide and nitrogen monoxide released into the atmosphere.
(c) Why do you think the converter sometimes consists of small ceramic 
beads coated with the catalyst?
(d) Suggest why the converter usually does not work effectively until the 
car engine has warmed up.
(e) Discuss whether the use of catalytic converters in cars solves the 
problem of car pollution.
Nature of Science, Tool 
3, Inquiry 3 – How can 
graphs provide evidence 
of systematic and 
random error?


424
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
How can the rate of a reaction be controlled?
Guiding Question revisited
In this chapter we have explored collision theory and investigative techniques to show:
• The rate of reaction is expressed as the change in concentration of a particular 
reactant or product per unit time. It has units of mol dm–3 s–1.
• Rate of reaction can be measured indirectly using different experimental 
techniques. The choice of technique will depend on the changes that occur 
during a specific reaction such as the production of a gas, the formation of a 
precipitate, or changes in the colour or electrical conductivity of a solution.
• The rate at a specific point in a reaction can be calculated from the gradient of a 
tangent on a graph of concentration, volume, absorbance or mass against time.
• For a reaction to occur, species must collide with sufficient kinetic energy and 
proper orientation. These collisions are known as ‘successful’ collisions.
• The minimum energy required for a successful collision is called the activation 
energy, Ea.
• The use of a catalyst and increases in pressure, concentration, surface area and 
temperature lead to an increase in the frequency of successful collisions per unit 
time and so increase the rate of a reaction.
• Catalysts increase the rate of reaction by providing an alternative reaction pathway 
with a lower Ea. This effect can be represented in a reaction energy profile.
• Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curves can be used to explain the effect of 
changing temperature and the use of a catalyst on the probability of successful 
collisions occurring.
Practice questions
1. Curve X on the graph shows the volume of oxygen formed during the catalytic 
decomposition of a 1.0 mol dm–3 solution of hydrogen peroxide:
2H2O2(aq) → O2(g) + 2H2O(l)
volume of 
oxygen formed
time
Y
X
Which change would produce curve Y?
A 
adding water
B 
adding some 0.1 mol dm–3 hydrogen peroxide solution
C 
using a different catalyst
D 
lowering the temperature


425
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
2. Which changes increase the rate of the reaction below?
C4H10(g) + Cl2(g) → C4H9Cl(l) + HCl(g)
I. 
increase of pressure
II. increase of temperature
III. removal of HCl(g)
A 
I and II only 
B 
I and III only
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III
3. Which experimental procedure could be used to determine the rate for the 
following reaction?
BrO3−(aq) + 5Br−(aq) + 6H+(aq) → 3Br2(aq) + 3H2O(l)
A 
measure the change in electrical conductivity in a given time
B 
measure the change in mass in a given time
C 
record the time taken for the formation of a precipitate
D 
measure the change in volume of gas produced in a given time
4. The catalyst manganese(IV) oxide, MnO2(s), increases the rate of the 
decomposition reaction of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2(aq). Which statements 
about MnO2 are correct?
I. 
The rate is independent of the particle size of MnO2.
II. MnO2 provides an alternative reaction pathway for the decomposition 
with a lower activation energy.
III. All the MnO2 is present after the decomposition of the hydrogen peroxide 
is complete.
A 
I and II only 
B 
I and III only
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III
5. Which of the following statements is incorrect?
A 
The rate of a chemical reaction depends on the temperature.
B 
Rate and time are directly proportional.
C 
The rate of most chemical reactions decreases with time.
D 
A catalyst for a reaction increases the rate of both its forward and 
backward reactions.
6. A student measures the rate of a reaction by timing the appearance of a 
precipitate that forms in aqueous solution. Which of the following factors 
would increase the time required for the precipitate to form?
A 
raising the temperature
B
adding a catalyst
C 
diluting the solution
D 
stirring the reaction mixture


426
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
Questions 7–9 refer to the reaction between magnesium carbonate and 
hydrochloric acid, which is as follows:
MgCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) →MgCl2(aq) + H2O(l) + CO2(g)
7. Which of the conditions described below will produce the fastest rate of reaction?
A 
2.0 mol dm–3 HCl and MgCO3 lumps
B
1.0 mol dm–3 HCl and MgCO3 powder
C 
2.0 mol dm–3 HCl and MgCO3 powder
D 
1.0 mol dm–3 HCl and MgCO3 lumps
8. Which of the following measurements would not be a suitable means to 
follow the rate of this reaction?
A
increase in mass of reaction mixture
B
increase in volume of gas produced at constant pressure
C
increase in pH of reaction mixture
D
increase in pressure of gas produced at constant volume
9. The sketch graph below represents the result of an experiment to measure the 
rate of this reaction.
volume of CO2
time
Which of the following is the best explanation for the shape of the graph?
A
The rate of reaction increases with time because the acid becomes 
more dilute.
B
The rate of reaction increases with time because the calcium carbonate 
pieces become smaller.
C
The rate of reaction decreases with time because the acid becomes 
more dilute.
D
The rate of reaction decreases with time because the calcium carbonate 
pieces become smaller.
10. Collision theory states that collisions between reactant molecules do not 
always lead to the formation of product. Which of the following is the best 
explanation for this statement?
A
The reactant molecules are at too low a concentration.
B
The reaction is at equilibrium.
C
The reaction needs a catalyst in order to occur.
D
The reactant molecules do not have sufﬁ cient energy.


427
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
11. It is found that in the reaction:
NO2(g) + CO(g) →NO(g) + CO2(g)
an increase in temperature increases the rate of reaction. 
Which of the statements below is the main reason for this?
A
The molecules collide more frequently.
B
The proportion of molecules with energy greater than the activation 
energy increases.
C
The pressure exerted by the molecules increases.
D
The proportion of molecules with the correct collision geometry 
increases.
12. Zinc metal reacts with copper(II) sulfate solution as follows:
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq) →Cu(s) + ZnSO4(aq)
Which of the following factors will increase the rate of reaction?
I. 
increasing the concentration of CuSO4(aq)
II. decreasing the size of the zinc pieces
III. carrying out the reaction at a higher temperature
A
I and II 
B
I and III 
C
II only
D 
I, II and III
13. Which of the following units could not be used to express the rate of 
a reaction?
A
mol dm–3 s
B
g cm–3 s–1
C
mol dm–3 s–1
D
g dm–3 s–1
14. The atmosphere consists mostly of the gases nitrogen, N2, and oxygen, O2. 
Under normal conditions these two gases react together to form nitrogen 
monoxide, NO, extremely slowly.
N2(g) + O2(g) →NO(g)
Which statement below is the best explanation for the low rate of this reaction?
A
The atmosphere does not contain a catalyst for this reaction.
B
The reaction between nitrogen and oxygen has a very high activation 
energy.
C
Oxygen molecules are more likely to collide with themselves than with 
nitrogen molecules.
D
The simultaneous collision of three molecules is unlikely.


428
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?
15. The graph below was obtained when zinc carbonate reacted with dilute 
hydrochloric acid under two different conditions, denoted as experiments A and B.
mass of
reaction mixture
time
B
A
(a) Write an equation including state symbols for the reaction occurring. 
(2)
(b) Explain why the mass of the reaction mixture decreases in both cases. (1)
(c) Make reference to collision theory to explain the shape of curve A. 
(3)
(d) Describe the measurements that could be made from the graph to 
compare the initial rates of the reactions in A and B. Comment on the
results expected. 
(3)
(e) The concentration of hydrochloric acid used in experiments A and B 
was the same. Suggest three possible differences in the conditions of 
experiments A and B. 
(3)
(f ) For each of the conditions given in (e), explain why it would affect the rate 
of the reaction. 
(6)
(g) The experiment was repeated using zinc metal in place of zinc carbonate.
Zn(s) + 2HCl(aq) →ZnCl2(aq) + H2(g)
Describe the differences you would expect in the results, and evaluate 
whether this is likely to be a satisfactory method for following the rate 
of reaction.  
(2)
(Total 20 marks)
16. The ﬁ gure below shows a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve for a sample 
of a gas at two different temperatures, T1 and T2.
number of particles with
kinetic energy, E
T1
T2
kinetic energy, E
(a) Deduce the relative values of T1 and T2. 
(1)
(b) Make reference to your answer to (a) to explain the differences in the
shape of the two graphs. 
(2)
(c) ‘A catalyst provides a reaction route with a lower activation energy,
and so increases the rate of reaction.’


429
REACTIVITY 2.2
How fast? The rate of chemical change
Justify this statement by means of a suitably labelled Maxwell-Boltzmann 
distribution curve, showing the proportion of reacting particles with and
without a catalyst.  
(4)
(d) Explain why catalysts increase the rate of reaction but have no effect on:
(i) the enthalpy change
(ii) the stoichiometric yield of a product  
(4)
 
(Total 11 marks)
17. The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2 , into water and oxygen gas is 
an exothermic reaction.
2H2O2(aq) →2H2O(l) + O2(g)
(a) On the axes below, sketch an energy proﬁ le for an exothermic reaction 
and annotate the key features. 
(3)
potential energy
reaction coordinate
(b) The enzyme ‘catalase’ can be used to increase the rate of decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide.
(i) Outline how the energy proﬁ le would change if catalase was added 
to the reaction mixture. 
(1)
(ii) Explain why the addition of catalase would have no effect on the 
enthalpy change of the reaction. 
(1)
 
(Total 5 marks)


How far? The extent of 
chemical change
2.3
REACTIVITY


