431
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change 
An agricultural landscape in the Netherlands. Our ability to feed a growing global population has been
dependent on our ability to mass produce plant fertilizer. Industrial scale production of ammonia, an
essential starting material in the production of fertilizer, was made possible through an understanding
of reversible reactions and the factors that can be used to influence them. Specifically, the Haber
process uses high pressures and a temperature of about 450 °C to maximize the conversion of nitrogen
and hydrogen gas into ammonia.
How can the extent of a reversible reaction be influenced?
Guiding Question
Imagine that you are part of the way along an escalator (a moving staircase) that is 
moving up, and you decide to run down it. If you can run down at exactly the same 
speed as the escalator is moving up, you will have no net (overall) movement. So, if 
someone were to take a picture of you at regular time intervals, it would seem as if you 
were not moving at all. Of course, in reality both you and the escalator are moving, but 
because there is no net change neither movement is observable. In chemical reactions 
a similar phenomenon occurs when a reaction takes place at the same rate as its 
reverse reaction, so no net change is observed. This is known as a state of dynamic
equilibrium.
In this chapter, we explore some of the features of the equilibrium state and learn how 
this enables us to predict how far reactions will proceed under different conditions. 
Industrial processes rely significantly on this type of study to determine the conditions 
that will maximize the yield of product. 
We will also see how  equilibrium law can be used to determine the equilibrium 
constant from the stoichiometry of a reaction. This temperature-dependent constant 
will allow us to quantify the extent of a reaction at equilibrium.
Equilibrium studies are also important in many biochemical and environmental 
processes, such as predicting the solubility of gases in the blood and knowing how 
certain chemicals in the atmosphere may react together to form pollutants that 
contribute to climate change.
Reactivity 2.3.1 – Dynamic equilibrium
Reactivity 2.3.1 – A state of dynamic equilibrium is reached in a closed system when 
the rates of forward and backward reactions are equal. 
Describe the characteristics of a physical and chemical system at equilibrium.
A state of dynamic equilibrium is reached in a 
closed system 
In this section we will think about how dynamic equilibrium is reached in both a 
physical system, in which we consider changes of state, and a chemical system, in 
which we consider reversible chemical reactions.
Snow and ice-covered 
peak in the Cordillera 
Huayhuash, Peru. Equilibrium 
considerations help explain 
the relationship between 
water vapour in the clouds 
and precipitations in the 
form of liquid (rain) and 
solid (snow) at different 
temperatures and pressures.


432
Physical systems 
Consider what happens when some bromine, Br2, is placed in a sealed container at 
room temperature.
As bromine is a volatile liquid, with a boiling point close to room temperature, a 
significant number of particles (molecules of Br2) will have enough energy to escape 
from the liquid state and form vapour in the process known as evaporation. As the 
container is sealed, the bromine vapour cannot escape and so its concentration will 
increase. Some of these vapour molecules will collide with the surface of the liquid, 
lose energy, and become liquid in the process known as condensation.
evaporation
Br2(l) 
 Br2(g)
condensation
Br2(g)
initial
at equilibrium
Br2(l)
Establishing dynamic equilibrium in the evaporation of bromine. Equilibrium is established when the 
rate of evaporation equals the rate of condensation.
The rate of condensation increases with the increase in concentration of vapour, as 
more vapour particles collide with the surface of the liquid. Eventually, the rate of 
condensation is equal to the rate of evaporation, and at this point there will be no net 
change in the amounts of liquid and gas present (Figure 1). We say that the system 
has reached equilibrium. This will only occur in a closed system, where the Br2(g) 
cannot escape as vapour but may condense back into the liquid.
Bromine is the only 
non-metallic element 
that is liquid at room 
temperature. It is 
extremely toxic and 
takes its name from a 
Greek word meaning 
stench.
rate
rate of
evaporation 5 rate of
condensation
rate of
condensation
rate of evaporation
time
R2.3 Figure 1 The 
rate of evaporation 
and condensation as 
liquid–vapour equilibrium 
is established in a closed 
system. The rate of 
evaporation is constant as 
the surface area remains 
the same, while the rate of 
condensation increases as 
the concentration of vapour 
increases. Equilibrium is 
established when the two 
rates are equal. 
Bromine stored in a 
sealed jar. The system is in 
dynamic equilibrium, so the 
concentrations of liquid and 
vapour do not change at 
constant temperature.
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


433
Chemical systems 
Consider the reaction of dissociation between hydrogen iodide (HI) and its elements 
hydrogen (H2) and iodine (I2). Hydrogen and hydrogen iodide are both colourless, 
whereas iodine is released as a purple gas.
2HI(g)  
⇌ 
 H2(g) 
 +  
  I2(g)
colourless gas 
colourless gas 
purple gas
If we carry out this reaction starting with hydrogen iodide in a sealed container, there 
will at first be an increase in the purple colour owing to the production of iodine gas. 
But after a while this increase in colour will stop, and it may appear that the reaction 
too has stopped. In fact, what has happened is that the rate of the dissociation of HI 
is fastest at the start when the concentration of HI is greatest and falls as the reaction 
proceeds. Meanwhile, the reverse reaction, which initially has a zero rate because 
there is no H2 or I2 present, starts slowly and increases in rate as the concentrations 
of H2 and I2 increase. Eventually, the rate of dissociation of HI becomes equal to the 
rate of the reverse reaction of association between H2 and I2, so the concentrations 
remain constant. This is why the colour in the flask remains the same. At this point, 
equilibrium has been reached. The equilibrium is described as dynamic because both 
forward and backward reactions are still occurring.
If we were to analyze the contents of the flask at this point, we would find that HI, 
H2 and I2 would all be present and that if there were no change in conditions, their 
concentrations would remain constant over time. We refer to this as the equilibrium 
mixture.
If we reversed the experiment and started with H2 and I2 instead of HI, we would 
find that eventually an equilibrium mixture would again be achieved in which the 
concentrations of H2, I2 and HI would remain constant. These relationships are shown 
in Figure 2.
(a) 
(b)
equilibrium
HI
concentration
H2, I2
time
 
and 
time
HI
H2, I2
concentration
equilibrium
R2.3 Figure 2 Equilibrium is reached when the concentrations of reactants and products become 
constant. Note that the same equilibrium mixture is reached whether you start (a) from a mixture of 
H2 and I2 or (b) from pure HI.
The equilibrium state has specific characteristics
In studies of equilibria, we are dealing with reversible reactions – that is, reactions that 
occur in both directions. The convention is to describe the reaction from left to right 
(reactants to products) as the forward reaction, and the reaction from right to left 
(products to reactants) as the backward or reverse reaction. The symbol ⇌ is used 
to show that the reaction is an equilibrium reaction.
The study of chemical 
change often involves 
both the macroscopic 
and submicroscopic 
scales. What might this 
suggest about the role 
of imagination and 
intuition in the creation 
of hypotheses in the 
natural sciences?
Heated iodine crystals in a 
stoppered flask. Iodine is 
a crystalline solid at room 
temperature, but sublimes on 
heating to form a purple gas.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


434
forward reaction
reactants 
 products
backward reaction
The Dragon spacecraft, first launched by the American company SpaceX in 2010, uses the combustion 
reaction between monomethyl hydrazine and the oxidizing agent dinitrogen tetroxide to produce 
thrust and orientate the spacecraft during a mission.
4CH3NHNH2 + 5N2O4 → 9N2 + 4CO2 + 12H2O
The strong N≡N bonds and C=O bonds found in the products make them significantly more stable 
than the reactants, and so the reaction can be considered non-reversible.
The examples of physical and chemical systems discussed above have shown that at 
equilibrium the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the backward reaction.
These reactions have also shown some of the main features of the equilibrium state, 
and these can now be summarized as they apply to all reactions at equilibrium.
Characteristics of a physical and 
a chemical system at equilibrium 
Explanation
1
Equilibrium is dynamic
The reaction has not stopped, but both forward and 
backward reactions are still occurring at the same rate.
2
Equilibrium is achieved in a closed 
system
A closed system has no exchange of matter with the 
surroundings, so equilibrium is achieved where both 
reactants and products can react and recombine with 
each other.
3
The concentrations of reactants 
and products remain constant at 
equilibrium
They are being produced and destroyed at an equal rate.
4
At equilibrium there is no change 
in macroscopic properties
Macroscopic properties are observable properties such as 
colour and density. These do not change as they depend 
on the concentrations of the components of the mixture.
5
Equilibrium can be reached from 
either direction
The same equilibrium mixture will result under the same 
conditions, no matter whether the reaction is started 
with all reactants, all products, or a mixture of both.
Strictly speaking, 
all reactions can 
be considered as 
equilibrium reactions. 
However, in many 
cases, the equilibrium 
mixture consists almost 
entirely of products – 
that is, it is considered 
to have gone virtually 
to completion. By 
convention we use 
the symbol → rather 
than the equilibrium 
symbol in these 
cases. Combustion 
reactions, for example, 
are considered 
irreversible given the 
relative stability of the 
products compared to 
the reactants. In other 
reactions there may 
be so little product 
formed that it is 
undetectable and we 
consider the reaction 
to have effectively not 
happened.
Make sure that you 
use the equilibrium 
symbol ⇌ when 
writing equations 
for reactions where 
the reverse reactions 
are significant. For 
example, it must be 
used when explaining 
the behaviour of 
weak acids and bases 
(Reactivity 3.1).
At equilibrium the 
rate of the forward 
reaction is equal 
to the rate of the 
backward reaction.
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


435
It is important to understand that even though the concentrations of reactant and 
product are constant at equilibrium, this in no way implies that they are equal. In 
fact, most commonly there will be a much higher concentration of either reactant 
or product in the equilibrium mixture, depending both on the reaction and on the 
conditions. For example, we can see in Figure 2 that when the dissociation of HI 
reaches equilibrium, there is a higher concentration of HI than of H2 and I2.
Challenge yourself
1. A closed system is defined differently in different disciplines. In 
thermodynamics, it means that no matter can be exchanged with the 
surroundings, but energy can flow. To what extent can the Earth can be 
considered a closed system?
Think back to the moving staircase analogy in the introduction to this chapter, where 
the top and bottom of the escalator represent reactants and products respectively. It 
would be possible for you to be ‘at equilibrium’ near the top of the staircase, near the 
bottom, or anywhere in between. As long as you were moving at the same speed as the 
staircase, you would still have no net change in position.
The proportion of reactant and 
product in the equilibrium mixture 
is referred to as its equilibrium 
position. Reactions where the 
mixture contains predominantly 
products are said to ‘lie to the right’ 
and reactions with predominantly 
reactants are said to ‘lie to the left’.
proportion in
equilibrium mixture 
equilibrium lies
to the left
equilibrium lies
to the right
reactants
products
products
reactants
It is, however, often useful to be able to capture this information mathematically to 
compare the equilibrium mixtures of different reactions and the effect of different 
conditions. In the next section we will look at how this is done.
Nature of Science
At equilibrium, no change is observed on the macroscopic level, although 
particles are reacting at the submicroscopic level. These changes can be 
deduced using techniques such as isotopic labelling, which allow the 
progress of a specific reactant to be followed. Our power of understanding is 
enhanced by contributions from instrumentation and sensors that may gather 
information beyond human sense perception.
Exercise
Q1. Which statements are correct for a reaction at equilibrium?
I. 
The forward and reverse reactions both continue.
II. The rates of the forward and reverse reactions are equal.
III. The concentrations of reactants and products are equal.
A 
I and II only 
B 
I and III only 
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III
What are the differences 
between theories and 
analogies as forms of 
explanation?
Conceptualize 
equilibrium with 'water 
races'. Full details of 
how to carry out this 
experiment with a 
worksheet are available 
in the eBook.
Describing the position of 
equilibrium
Sometimes you may 
see the equilibrium sign 
written with unequal 
arrows such as 
. This 
is used to represent 
the reaction that lies 
in favour of products. 
Likewise,
 is used to 
represent a reaction 
that lies in favour of 
reactants.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


436
Q2. Which statement is always true for a chemical reaction that has reached 
equilibrium at constant temperature?
A 
The yield of product(s) is greater than 50%.
B 
The rate of the reverse reaction is lower than that of the forward reaction.
C 
The amounts of reactants and products do not change.
D 
Both forward and reverse reactions have stopped.
Q3. Which statement is not true for a mixture of ice and water at equilibrium at 
constant temperature?
A 
The rates of melting and freezing are equal.
B 
The amounts of ice and water are equal.
C 
The same position of equilibrium can be reached by cooling water and 
by heating ice.
D 
There is no observable change in the system.
Reactivity 2.3.2 and 2.3.3 – Equilibrium law
Reactivity 2.3.2 – The equilibrium law describes how the equilibrium constant, K, can 
be determined from the stoichiometry of a reaction. 
Deduce the equilibrium constant expression from an equation for a homogeneous reaction.
Reactivity 2.3.3 – The magnitude of the equilibrium constant indicates the extent of a 
reaction at equilibrium and is temperature dependent. 
Determine the relationships between K values for reactions that are the reverse of each other 
at the same temperature.
Include the extent of reaction for:
K ≪ 1, K < 1, K = 1, K > 1, K ≫ 1.
Reactivity 3.1 – How does the value of 
K for the dissociation of an acid convey 
information about the strength of the acid?
The equilibrium constant, K, can be predicted from 
the reaction stoichiometry 
Consider the reaction
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g)
If we were to carry out a series of experiments on this reaction with different starting 
concentrations of H2, I2, and HI, we could wait until each reaction reached equilibrium 
and then measure the composition of each equilibrium mixture. Here are some typical 
results obtained at 440 °C.
Experiment I
Initial concentration / mol dm–3
Equilibrium concentration / mol dm–3
H2
0.100
0.0222
I2
0.100
0.0222
HI
0.000
0.1560
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


437
Experiment II
Initial concentration / mol dm–3
Equilibrium concentration / mol dm–3
H2
0.0000
0.0350
I2
0.0100
0.0450
HI
0.3500
0.2800
Experiment III
Initial concentration / mol dm–3
Equilibrium concentration / mol dm–3
H2
0.0150
0.0150
I2
0.0000
0.0135
HI
0.1270
0.1000
At a glance, the data may not appear to show any pattern. However, there is a 
predictable relationship among the different compositions of these equilibrium 
mixtures, and the key to discovering it is in the stoichiometry of the reaction equation.
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g)
If we take the equilibrium concentrations and process them in the following way:
[H
2 = coefﬁcient of HI in the reaction equation
1 = coefﬁcient of H2 in the reaction equation
1 = coefﬁcient of I2 in the reaction equation
I]
[H ]
[I ]
eqm
2
2 eqm
1
2 eqm
1
we find the following results:
Experiment I 
(0.156)2
_____________ 
 
0.0222 × 0.0222 = 49.4
Experiment II 
(0.280)2
____________ 
 
0.035 × 0.0450 = 49.8
Experiment III 
(0.100)2
_____________ 
 
0.0150 × 0.0135 = 49.4
Clearly, this way of processing the equilibrium data produces a constant value within 
the limits of experimental accuracy. The constant is known as the equilibrium 
constant, K. It has a fixed value for this reaction at a specified temperature.
In fact, every reaction has its own particular value of K which can be derived in a 
similar way. This finding is described by the equilibrium law.
• First we use the balanced reaction equation to write the equilibrium constant 
expression.
For the reaction:
aA + bB ⇌ c C + d D
the equilibrium constant expression is
K =  
[C]c
eqm[D]d
eqm
___________
[A]a
eqm[B]b
eqm
 
• The value for K can then be determined by substituting the equilibrium 
concentrations of all reactants and products into this equation.
As K is calculated using 
the concentrations of 
reactants and products, 
it is commonly stated 
as Kc in other sources. 
The ‘c’ stands for 
‘concentration’.
The equilibrium 
law states that 
the equilibrium 
constant, K, has a 
fixed value for a 
particular reaction 
at a specified 
temperature. The 
only thing that 
changes the value of 
K for a reaction is the 
temperature.
Remember square 
brackets [ ] are 
commonly used to 
show concentration in 
mol dm–3.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


438
Note the following:
• The equilibrium constant expression has the concentrations of products in the 
numerator and the concentrations of reactants in the denominator.
• Each concentration is raised to the power of its coefficient in the balanced 
equation. (Where the power is equal to one, it is not shown.)
• Where there is more than one reactant or product, the terms are multiplied 
together.
Worked example 
Write the equilibrixm constant expression for the following reactions.
(i) 2H2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2H2O(g)
(ii) Cu2+(aq) + 4NH3(aq) ⇌ [Cu(NH3)4]2+(aq)
Solution
(i)
K = 
  [H2O]2
________
[H2]2[O2] 
(ii) K = 
  [[Cu(NH3)4]2+] 
 
____________
[Cu2+][NH3]4  
The magnitude of K gives information on the extent of reaction 
Different reactions have different values of K. What does this value tell us about a 
particular reaction?
As the equilibrium constant expression puts products in the numerator and reactants 
in the denominator, a high value of K will mean that at equilibrium there are 
proportionately more products than reactants. In other words, such an equilibrium 
mixture lies to the right and the reaction goes almost to completion. By contrast, a 
low value of K must mean that there are proportionately fewer products with respect 
to reactants, so the equilibrium mixture lies to the left and the reaction has barely 
taken place.
Consider the following three reactions and their K values measured at 550 K.
H2(g) +    I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g) 
K = 2
H2(g) + Br2(g) ⇌ 2HBr(g) 
K = 1010
H2(g) + Cl2(g) ⇌ 2HCl(g) 
K = 1018
The large range in their K values tells us about the differing extents of these reactions. 
We can deduce that the reaction between H2 and Cl2 has taken place the most fully at 
this temperature, while H2 and I2 have reacted the least.
Challenge yourself
2. Why do you think the reactions of the three halogens, Cl2, Br2 and I2, with 
H2 have such different values for their equilibrium constant at the same 
temperature? What can you conclude about the strength of bonding in the three 
hydrogen halides?
Many sources give 
units for K which 
are a multiple of 
mol dm–3, depending 
on the stoichiometry 
of the reaction. In 
fact, this is not fully 
correct, as the terms 
in the equilibrium 
expression are really a 
thermodynamic quality 
known as ‘activity’ that 
has no units. For this 
reason, we are omitting 
units in the values of K
here, and you will not 
be required to include 
them in IB examination 
answers.
The equilibrium 
constant expression 
will only give the 
value of K when 
the concentrations 
used in the equation 
are the equilibrium
concentrations for all 
reactants and products. 
Strictly speaking, 
the subscript ‘eqm’ 
should always be 
used in the equation, 
but by convention 
this is generally left 
out. However, make 
completely sure that 
the only values you 
substitute into an 
equation to calculate 
K are the equilibrium 
concentrations.
The equilibrium 
constant expressions 
described here apply 
to homogeneous 
reactions, that is, 
reactions where 
reactants and products 
are in the same phase, 
as gases, liquids, or 
in solution. It is good 
practice always to 
include state symbols 
in your equations to 
ensure this is being 
applied correctly.
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


439
A good rule of thumb to apply to these situations is that if K ≫ 1, the reaction is 
considered to go almost to completion (very high conversion of reactants into 
products), and if K ≪ 1, the reaction hardly proceeds.
K very
small
equilibrium lies 
to the left in 
favour of reactants
equilibrium lies 
to the right in 
favour of products
K very
large
1
The smaller the value of K, the further the equilibrium mixture lies to the left. The larger the value of K, 
the further the equilibrium mixture lies to the right.
This can be summarized as follows.
Value of K
Extent of reaction
K ≪ 1
Reaction hardly proceeds
K < 1
Equilibrium lies towards the reactants
K = 1
Signiﬁ cant amounts of both reactants and products at equilibrium
K > 1
Equilibrium lies towards the products
K ≫ 1
Reaction goes almost to completion
Note that the magnitude of K does not give us any information on the rate of the 
reaction. It informs us of the nature of the equilibrium mixture, but not how quickly 
the equilibrium state will be achieved.
The value of K can be particularly useful to consider the dissociation of an acid in 
solution. Weak acids undergo very little dissociation so will have very low values of K
whereas a stronger acid will dissociate to a greater extent, producing a larger value of K.
Consider the values of Ka for the dissociation of methanoic acid, HCOOH, and ethanoic 
acid, CH3COOH, in aqueous solution at 298 K:
 
HCOOH(aq) ⇌ HCOO–(aq) + H+(aq) 
Ka = 1.78 × 10–4
 
CH3COOH(aq) ⇌ CH3COO–(aq) + H+(aq) 
Ka = 1.74 × 10–5
Here we can see that although the equilibrium lies to the left for both acids, HCOOH 
undergoes a greater degree of dissociation as it has a larger value of Ka. Note that the ‘a’ 
refers specifically to the equilibrium mixture formed by the dissociation of an acid.
Relationships between K values for reactions that are the 
reverse of each other at the same temperature 
As K is defined with products in the numerator and reactants in the denominator, 
each raised to the power of their stoichiometric coefficients in the balanced equation, 
we can manipulate the value of K according to changes made to these terms. For this 
discussion we will consider the generic reaction:
aA + bB ⇌ c C + dD
for which the equilibrium constant is:
K =  [C]c[D]d
_______
[A]a[B]b 
The magnitude of 
the equilibrium 
constant K gives 
information about 
the extent of reaction 
at a particular 
temperature, but 
not about how fast 
it will achieve the 
equilibrium state.
Reactivity 3.1 – How 
does the value of K for 
the dissociation of an 
acid convey information 
about its strength?
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


440
The reverse reaction
c C + dD ⇌ aA + bB
defines the products as reactants and vice versa. We will denote its equilibrium 
constant as K ′.
K′ =  [A]a[B]b
_______
[C]c[D]d 
We can see that  
K′ =  1__
K  
 or 
K′ = K–1.
In other words, the equilibrium constant for a reaction is the reciprocal of the 
equilibrium constant for its reverse reaction.
Worked example 
The equilibrium constant for the reaction
2HI(g) ⇌ H2(g) + I2(g)
is 0.040 at a certain temperature. What would be the value of the equilibrium 
constant, K ′, for the reverse reaction
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g) 
at the same temperature?
Solution
The value of K′ is the reciprocal of K.
So K′ =  1__
K 
or 
K –1
∴K′ =  1
_____
0.040 = 25
This manipulation of the value of K is summarized below.
Effect on equilibrium expression 
Effect on K
reversing the reaction
inverts the expression
1__
K or K–1 
Challenge yourself
3. We can also express the relationship between K and K′ for multiples of a 
reaction. Doubling the reaction coefficients squares the equilibrium expression, 
K′ = K2 , and halving the reaction coefficients square roots the equilibrium 
expression, K′′ =  √
__
K .
At a given temperature, the reaction
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g)
has a value of K = 278. Determine values of K for the following reactions at this 
temperature.
(a)  
4SO2(g) + 2O2(g) ⇌ 4SO3(g)
(b)  
SO3(g) ⇌ SO2(g) +  1_
2 O2(g)
(c)  
6SO3(g) ⇌ 6SO2(g) + 3O2(g)
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


441
Exercise
Q4. Write the equilibrium constant expression for the following reactions:
(a) 2NO(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
(b) 4NH3(g) + 7O2(g) ⇌ 4NO2(g) + 6H2O(g)
(c) CH3Cl(aq) + OH–(aq) ⇌ CH3OH(aq) + Cl–(aq)
Q5. Write the equations for the reactions represented by the following 
equilibrium constant expressions:
(a) K =  [NO2]2
______
[N2O4] 
(b) K =  [CO][H2]3
__________
[CH4][H2O] 
Q6. Write the equilibrium constant expressions for the following chemical 
reactions:
(a) ﬂ uorine gas and chlorine gas combine to form ClF3(g)
(b) NO dissociates into its elements
(c) methane, CH4, and steam react to form carbon monoxide and hydrogen.
Q7. When the following reactions reach equilibrium at a given temperature, 
does the equilibrium mixture contain mostly reactants or mostly products? 
Assume that the values for K are applicable at the given temperature.
(a) N2(g) + 2H2(g) ⇌ N2H4(g) 
K = 7.4 × 10–26
(b) N2(g) + O2 (g) ⇌ 2NO(g) 
K = 2.7 × 10–18
(c) 2NO(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g) 
K = 6.0 × 1013
Q8. At 298 K, the equilibrium concentrations in the reaction mixture:
N2O4(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
are [N2O4] = 1.62 mol dm−3 and [NO2] = 1.80 mol dm−3.
Determine the value of the equilibrium constant, K.
Q9. At a given temperature, the reaction
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g)
has a value of K = 278. 
Determine the value of K for the reverse reaction at this temperature.
Reactivity 2.3.4 – Le Châtelier’s principle
Reactivity 2.3.4 – Le Châtelier’s principle enables the prediction of the qualitative effects 
of changes in concentration, temperature and pressure to a system at equilibrium. 
Apply Le Châtelier’s principle to predict and explain responses to changes of systems at 
equilibrium.
Include the effects on the value of K and on 
the equilibrium composition. 
Le Châtelier’s principle can be applied to 
heterogeneous equilibria such as: 
X(g) ⇌ X(aq)
Reactivity 2.2 – Why do catalysts have no 
effect on the value of K or on the equilibrium 
composition?
Observations of shifts 
in the position of 
chemical equilibria. Full 
details of how to carry 
out this experiment 
with a worksheet are 
available in the eBook.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


442
A system at equilibrium will respond when 
subjected to a change 
A system remains at equilibrium so long as the rate of the forward reaction equals the 
rate of the backward reaction. But as soon as this balance is disrupted by any change 
in conditions that unequally affects the rates of these reactions, the equilibrium 
condition will no longer be met. It has been shown, however, that equilibria respond 
in a predictable way to such a situation based on a principle known as Le Châtelier’s 
principle. This states that a system at equilibrium when subjected to a change will respond 
in such a way as to minimize the effect of the change. Simply put, this means that whatever 
we do to a system at equilibrium, the system will respond in the opposite way. 
Add something, and the system will react to remove it; remove something, and the 
system will react to replace it. After a while, a new equilibrium will be established 
and this will have a different composition from the earlier equilibrium mixture. 
Applying the principle, therefore, enables us to predict the qualitative effect of typical 
changes that occur to systems at equilibrium.
Changes in concentration 
Suppose an equilibrium is disrupted by an increase in the concentration of one of the 
reactants. This will cause the rate of the forward reaction to increase while the backward 
reaction will not be affected, so the reaction rates will no longer be equal. When 
equilibrium re-establishes itself, the mixture will have new concentrations of all reactants 
and products, and the equilibrium will have shifted in favour of products. The value of K
will be unchanged. This is in keeping with the prediction from Le Châtelier’s principle: 
the addition of reactant causes the system to respond by removing reactant – this favours 
the forward reaction and so shifts the equilibrium to the right.
Similarly, the equilibrium could be disrupted by a decrease in the concentration 
of product by removing product from the equilibrium mixture. As the rate of the 
backward reaction is now decreased, there will be a shift in the equilibrium in favour 
of the products. A different equilibrium position will be achieved, but the value of K
will be unchanged. Again, this confirms the prediction from Le Châtelier’s principle: 
removal of product causes the system to respond by making more product – this 
favours the forward reaction and so shifts the equilibrium to the right.
Henri-Louis Le 
Châtelier was a 
French chemist who 
published his equilibria 
principle in 1884. 
Among other research, 
he also investigated 
the possibility of 
ammonia synthesis, 
but abandoned his 
efforts after suffering a 
devastating explosion 
in his laboratory. 
After Haber’s later 
elucidation of the 
conditions required 
in the reaction, Le 
Châtelier realized that 
he had been very 
close to the discovery 
himself. Later in his life, 
he noted ‘It was the 
greatest blunder of my 
career’.
When a system 
at equilibrium 
is subjected to 
a change, it will 
respond in such a 
way as to minimize 
the effect of the 
change.
Experiment to show the effect 
of changing the concentration 
of chloride ions on the cobalt 
chloride equilibrium reaction:
[Co(H2O)6]2+(aq) + 4Cl–(aq) ⇋
CoCl42–(aq) + 6H2O(l)
The flask on the left has a low 
concentration of chloride ions, 
giving the pink colour of the 
complex ion with water. As the 
concentration of chloride ions 
is increased, the equilibrium 
shifts to the right, changing 
the colour from pink to blue. 
Adding water would shift the 
equilibrium in the opposite 
direction. Cobalt chloride 
is often used to test for the 
presence of water because of 
this colour change.
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


443
The graph in Figure 3 illustrates these disruptions to equilibrium for the reaction
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g)
H2 added
here
NH3 removed
here
equilibrium
H2
N2
NH3
equilibrium
time
concentrations
equilibrium
After H2 is added, the concentrations of N2 and H2 decrease (in a 1:3 ratio in keeping 
with their reaction stoichiometry), while the concentration of NH3 rises (in a 2:1 ratio 
relative to N2) as the rate of the forward reaction increases and the equilibrium shifts 
to the right. The new equilibrium mixture has a higher concentration of products. 
In the second part of the graph, removal of NH3 from the equilibrium mixture causes a 
decrease in the concentrations of N2 and H2 as they react to form more NH3.
Often in an industrial process, the product will be removed as it forms. This ensures 
that the equilibrium is continuously pulled to the right, increasing the yield of product.
Applying Le Châtelier’s principle, can you think what concentration changes 
would cause an equilibrium to shift to the left? The answer is either an increase in 
concentration of product or a decrease in concentration of reactant.
Changes in pressure 
Equilibria involving gases will be affected by a change in pressure if the reaction 
involves a change in the number of molecules. This is because there is a direct 
relationship between the number of gas molecules and the pressure exerted by a gas in 
a fixed volume. So if such a reaction at equilibrium is subject to an increase in pressure, 
the system responds to decrease this pressure by favouring the side with the smaller 
number of molecules. Conversely, a decrease in pressure will cause a shift in the 
equilibrium position to the side with the larger number of molecules of gas. A different 
equilibrium position will be achieved but the value of K will be unchanged, so long as 
the temperature remains the same.
For example, consider the reaction used in the production of methanol:
CO(g) + 2H2(g) ⇌ CH3OH(g)
In total, there are three molecules of gas on the left side and one molecule of gas on the 
right side. So for this reaction, high pressure will shift the equilibrium to the right, in 
favour of the smaller number of molecules, which increases the yield of CH3OH.
R2.3 Figure 3 Effects of 
the addition of reactant 
and removal of product 
on the equilibrium 
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g). 
When H2 is added, the rate 
of the forward reaction with 
N2 increases and more NH3
is formed. The equilibrium 
shifts to the right. When NH3
is removed, the rate of the 
backward reaction decreases, 
and again, the equilibrium 
shifts to the right producing 
more NH3. After each 
change, a new equilibrium 
mixture is achieved but K
remains constant.
Changes in pressure 
or volume will 
affect the position 
of equilibrium 
of a reaction if it 
involves a change in 
the number of gas 
molecules.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


444
Note that many common equilibrium reactions do not involve a change in the number of 
gas molecules and so are not affected by changes in pressure. For example, the reaction
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g)
has two molecules of gas on both sides of the equation. Changing the pressure for this 
reaction will affect the rate of the reaction but not the position of equilibrium or the 
value of K.
Changes in temperature 
We have noted that K is temperature dependent, so changing the temperature 
will change K. However, in order to predict how K will change we must examine 
the enthalpy changes (see Reactivity 1.1) of the forward and backward reactions. 
Remember that an exothermic reaction releases energy (∆H is negative), whereas an 
endothermic reaction absorbs energy (∆H is positive). The enthalpy changes of the 
forward and backward reactions are equal and opposite to each other.
So if we apply Le Châtelier’s principle, including the energy change in the chemical 
reaction, we can predict how the reaction will respond to a change in temperature.
Consider the reaction
2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g) 
∆H = –57 kJ mol–1
 
brown 
colourless
The negative sign of ∆H tells us that the forward reaction is exothermic and so releases 
heat. If this reaction at equilibrium is subjected to a decrease in temperature, the 
system will respond by producing heat and it does this by favouring the forward 
exothermic reaction. This means that the equilibrium will shift to the right, in favour 
of the product, N2O4. A new equilibrium mixture will be achieved and the value of K
will increase. So here we can see that the reaction will give a higher yield of products at 
a lower temperature.
Conversely, increasing the temperature favours the backward, endothermic, reaction, 
and so shifts the equilibrium to the left, decreasing the value of K. The reaction mixture 
becomes a darker colour as the concentration of NO2 increases.
The table below illustrates the effect of temperature on the value of K for this reaction.
Temperature / K
K for 2NO2(g) ⇋ N2O4(g)
273
1300
298
170
Even though, in this case, a lower temperature will produce an equilibrium mixture 
with a higher proportion of products, remember from Reactivity 2.2 that low 
temperature also causes a lower rate of reaction. And so, although a higher yield will 
be produced eventually, it may simply take too long to achieve this for practical and 
economic considerations if this was an industrial-scale reaction. We will come back to 
this point later in this chapter.
Now consider the following reaction:
N2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2NO(g) ∆H = +181 kJ mol–1
Changes in 
concentration, 
pressure or volume 
may change 
the position of 
equilibrium, but 
have no effect on 
the value of K.
When ∆H is given 
for an equilibrium 
reaction, by convention 
its sign refers to the 
forward reaction. So 
a negative sign for 
∆H means that the 
forward reaction is 
exothermic, and the 
backward reaction is 
endothermic.
Experiment to show the 
effect of temperature on the 
reaction that converts NO2
(brown) to N2O4 (colourless). 
As the temperature is 
increased, more NO2 is 
produced and the gas 
becomes darker, as seen in 
the tube on the left. With 
a decrease in temperature 
(the tube on the right), the 
equilibrium shifts to the 
right, producing more N2O2, 
and the gas becomes paler. 
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


445
In this case, we can see that the forward reaction is endothermic and so absorbs 
heat. So here the effect of a decreased temperature will be to favour the backward 
exothermic reaction. Therefore, the equilibrium will shift to the left in favour of 
reactants, and K will decrease. At higher temperatures, the forward, endothermic, 
reaction is favoured, so the equilibrium shifts to the right and K will increase.
The table below illustrates the effect of temperature on the value of K for this reaction.
Temperature / K
K for N2(g) + O2(g) ⇋ 2NO(g)
298
4.5 × 10–31
900
6.7 × 10–10
2300
1.7 × 10–3
Challenge yourself
4. Use information from this section to explain why there is very little NO in the 
atmosphere under ordinary conditions, and why severe air pollution is often 
characterized by a brownish haze.
The reaction N2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2NO(g) takes place in motor vehicles where the heat released 
by combustion of the fuel is sufficient to cause the nitrogen and oxygen gases from the 
air to combine. Unfortunately, the product, NO, is toxic, and, worse still, quickly becomes 
converted into other toxins that form the components of acid rain and smog. It is therefore 
of great interest to vehicle manufacturers to find ways of lowering the temperature during 
combustion in order to reduce the production of NO in the reaction above.
These examples illustrate that, unlike changes in concentration and pressure, 
changes in temperature do cause the value of K to change. An increase in temperature 
increases the value of K for an endothermic reaction and decreases the value of K for 
an exothermic reaction. This is because changes in temperature have a different effect 
on the rates of the forward and backward reactions due to their different activation 
energies, as discussed in Reactivity 2.2. In the next chapter, we will use this fact to 
explain why the pH of pure water is temperature dependent.
Addition of a catalyst 
As we learn in Reactivity 2.2, a catalyst speeds up the rate of a reaction by providing an 
alternative reaction pathway that has a transition state with a lower activation energy, 
Ea. This increases the number of particles that have sufficient energy to react without 
raising the temperature.
Because the forward and backward reactions pass through the same transition state, 
a catalyst lowers the activation energy by the same amount for the forward and 
backward reactions. So the rate of both these reactions will be increased by the same 
factor, as shown in Figure 4. The catalyst will therefore have no effect on the position 
of equilibrium, or on the value of K. In other words, the catalyst will not increase the 
equilibrium yield of product in a reaction. It will, however, speed up the attainment 
of the equilibrium state and so cause products to form more quickly. Catalysts are 
generally not shown in the reaction equation or in the equilibrium constant expression 
as they are not chemically changed at the end of the reaction and have no effect on the 
equilibrium concentrations.
Combustion reactions 
are generally described 
as exothermic, but the 
reaction
N2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2NO(g)
is endothermic. 
When is it appropriate 
to refer to an ‘exception 
to a rule’, and when 
does the rule need to 
be reconsidered? 
Increasing the 
temperature causes 
an increase in 
the value of K for 
an endothermic 
reaction and a 
decrease in the 
value of K for an 
exothermic reaction.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


446
Ea of the backward
catalyzed reaction
lowering of Ea
in the presence of
a catalyst
Ea of forward catalyzed reaction
reaction coordinate
reactants
 potential energy
products
catalyzed
reaction
reaction coordinate
reactants
 potential energy
products
Ea of
backward
reaction
Ea of forward
reaction
uncatalyzed
reaction
R2.3 Figure 4 The effect of a catalyst in lowering the activation energy of both forward and 
backward reactions.
Catalysts are widely used in industrial processes to increase the rate of product 
formation and are involved in every single biochemical reaction, where they are 
known as enzymes. One of the key principles of Green Chemistry is that catalytic 
reagents, chosen to be as selective as possible, are superior to stoichiometric reagents 
as they are not consumed in the reaction.
Summary 
We can now summarize the effects of concentration, pressure, temperature and 
catalyst on the position of equilibrium and on the value of K.
Effect of …
Change in position of equilibrium
Change in value of K
1 concentration
changes
no change
2 pressure
changes if reaction involves a change in the 
number of gas molecules
no change
3 temperature
changes
changes
4 catalyst
no change
no change
It is worth noting that although we have only seen examples of homogeneous 
equilibria (in the gaseous phase) in this section, we can also apply Le Châtelier’s 
principle to heterogeneous equilibria involving reactants and products in gaseous and 
aqueous states.
Consider, for example, a fizzy drink b ottle which contains an equilibrium between 
dissolved carbon dioxide and gaseous carbon dioxide.
CO2(g) ⇌ CO2(aq)
When the bottle is opened, releasing some of the gaseous CO2, the equilibrium shifts 
to the left. We can see this change occur in the formation of CO2 bubbles. Once the cap 
is placed back onto the bottle, a new equilibrium composition will be formed but the 
equilibrium constant will remain the same.
Reactivity 2.2 – Why 
do catalysts have no 
eﬀ ect on the value of K
or on the equilibrium 
composition?
Catalysts do not 
change the position 
of equilibrium or 
the equilibrium 
yield of a single 
reaction, but 
they enable the 
equilibrium mixture 
to be achieved 
more quickly.
A particular reaction 
at a specified 
temperature can 
have many different 
possible equilibrium 
positions, but 
only one value for 
the equilibrium 
constant K.
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


447
If the system remains open, the equilibrium continues to shift to the left until no 
dissolved carbon dioxide remains and the drink becomes flat.
Applying Le Châtelier’s principle 
In reactions involving the manufacture of a chemical, it is obviously a goal to obtain 
as high a conversion of reactant to product as possible. Application of Le Châtelier’s 
principle enables chemists to choose conditions that will cause the equilibrium 
to lie to the right and so help to achieve this. But the yield of a reaction is only part 
of the consideration. The rate is also clearly of great significance as it would be of 
limited value if a process were able to claim a high equilibrium yield of product, 
but took several years to achieve this. The economics of the process will depend on 
considerations of both the equilibrium and the kinetics of the reaction – in other 
words, on how far and how fast the reaction will proceed. Sometimes these two 
criteria work against each other, and so the best compromise must be reached. Two 
case studies of industrial processes are discussed here.
It is estimated that over 150 million tonnes of ammonia, NH3, are produced worldwide every 
year. Approximately 80% of this ammonia is used to make fertilizers, notably ammonium 
nitrate, NH4NO3. Other uses include synthesis of textiles such as nylon and powerful 
explosives. In August 2020, a major explosion occurred in the Port of Beirut after 2750 tonnes 
of confiscated ammonium nitrate was ignited by a fire in an adjacent warehouse. Accidents 
such as this in industrial plants raise many questions regarding health and safety, storage, and 
handling of chemicals, and the balance of responsibility between companies, governments, 
and individuals.
The Port of Beirut explosion killed over 200 people and caused up to $15 billion in property damage.
The fizzing we see when 
we open carbonated drinks 
is caused by a shift in 
equilibrium from aqueous 
carbon dioxide to gaseous 
carbon dioxide:
CO2(g) ⇌ CO2(aq)
Note that you are 
not expected to learn 
specific conditions for 
any reaction, so there 
is no need to focus on 
the names of catalysts, 
specific temperature 
used, etc. But you 
should be able to apply 
an understanding of 
equilibria to any given 
example, and predict 
the conditions likely to 
be effective.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


448
Worked example 
The Haber process is based on the reaction:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g) 
∆H = –93 kJ mol–1
Deduce the conditions that would maximize the conversion of reactants to 
products in this reaction.
Solution
The following information can be derived from this equation:
• all reactants and products are gases
• there is a change in the number of gas molecules as the reaction proceeds: four 
gas molecules on the left and two on the right
• the forward reaction is exothermic so releases heat; the backward reaction is 
endothermic so absorbs heat.
Application of Le Châtelier’s principle to this reaction enables us to consider the 
optimum conditions for converting reactants to products.
• Concentration: we would need to increase the concentration of the reactants 
nitrogen and hydrogen by adding more to the reaction vessel (in the molar 
ratio 1:3 in accordance with their stoichiometry in the equation) and decrease
the concentration of ammonia by removing it as it forms. These changes would 
both shift the equilibrium to the right.
• Pressure: as the forward reaction involves a decrease in the number of gas 
molecules, it will be favoured by a high pressure.
• Temperature: as the forward reaction is exothermic, it will be favoured by a 
lower temperature. However, too low a temperature would cause the rate of 
reaction to be uneconomically slow, and so a moderate temperature is used as a 
compromise.
• Catalyst: a catalyst does not affect the position of equilibrium but will speed up 
the rate of production and so help to compensate for the moderate temperature 
used. An iron-based catalyst is used in the Haber process.
In fact, the Haber process achieves a conversion of H2 and N2 into NH3 of only about 
10–20% per pass through the reactor. After separation of the NH3 product, the 
unconverted reactants are recycled to the reactor to obtain an overall yield of about 
95%. This recycling of unconverted reactants is commonly used in industrial processes 
and allows processes with low equilibrium yield to be made commercially viable. 
Designing processes that prevent or minimize waste is the first of the 12 principles of 
Green Chemistry.
Tractor applying a chemical solution of fertilizer to the soil. Ammonium salts such as ammonium 
nitrate and sulfate are particularly effective fertilizers as they supply the nitrogen needed by plants 
and are readily soluble. It is estimated that without the use of ammonium fertilizers, 2 billion 
people would starve.
Fritz Haber and Carl 
Bosch developed 
the process for the 
industrial synthesis 
of ammonia from its 
elements, and the first 
factory for ammonia 
production opened in 
Germany in 1913, just 
before the First World 
War. This development 
enabled the continued 
production of 
explosives when 
imports of nitrate, used 
for producing nitric 
acid and explosives 
such as TNT, were 
barred through 
blockaded ports. This 
effectively enabled 
Germany to continue 
its war efforts for 
another four years. 
Haber was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in 
Chemistry in 1918. 
In many ways history 
has recorded this as a 
controversial choice – 
not only had Haber’s 
work helped to prolong 
the war, he had also 
been responsible for 
the development and 
use of chlorine as the 
first poison gas.
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


449
Nature of Science
Scientific discoveries often have significant economic, ethical and political 
implications. Some of these may be unintended consequences of the 
discovery, such as the environmental degradation caused by the excess use of 
nitrate fertilizers as an outcome of the Haber process. This raises the question 
of who must take moral responsibility for the applications of scientific 
discoveries. The process of science includes risk-benefit analyses, risk 
assessment, and ethical considerations, but sometimes the full consequences 
cannot be predicted and do not become known until much later.
Challenge yourself
5. Consider the atom economy of the Haber process described here using the 
formula:
% atom economy =  molar mass of desired product 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
 
molar mass of all reactants  × 100
Explain how the atom economy is different from the reaction yield.
In a similar manner to the Haber process, the production of methanol involves an 
exothermic homogeneous reaction in the gaseous state with more molecules of gas on 
the left side of the equation:
CO(g) + 2H2(g) ⇌ CH3OH(g)
∆H = –90 kJ mol–1
Again, Le Châtelier’s principle can be used to consider the pressure and temperature 
conditions that will optimize the conversion of reactants to products.
Condition used
Reasoning
High pressure
The forward reaction involves a reduction in the number of 
molecules of gas from three molecules of reactant to one molecule 
of product. High pressure will shift the equilibrium to the right.
Moderate temperature
The forward reaction is exothermic so a low temperature will 
increase the equilibrium yield but decrease the rate. A moderate 
temperature is used as a compromise. 
A catalyst will also be used to increase the rate of reaction although it has no impact on 
the position of equilibrium.
Methanol, CH3OH, is used as a chemical feedstock to make other chemicals. A high 
proportion is converted into methanal, HCHO, which is then converted into plastics, paints, 
explosives, and plywood. Methanol is used as a laboratory solvent, as an antifreeze agent, 
and in the process of producing biodiesel fuel from fats. Interest has also focused on the 
potential of methanol as an energy storage molecule in the so-called ‘methanol economy’. 
In on-going efforts to reduce dependence on imported fossil fuels, China has greatly 
increased production capacity and consumption of methanol for its transportation sector. 
In 2021, China had over 20 000 methanol taxis in operation.
Drivers stand beside the 
first batch of M100 (pure 
methanol) taxis 
in China’s Shaanxi province 
in 2018.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


450
The Contact process is an industrially significant reaction used to produce sulfuric acid, 
H2SO4. One step in this process is shown below.
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g)
∆H = –198 kJ mol–1
As we have seen throughout this section, Le Châtelier’s principle can be used to predict the 
conditions that will maximize the production of sulfur trioxide in this step. More sulfuric 
acid by mass is produced worldwide than any other chemical. It has been found that the 
production of sulfuric acid closely mirrors historical events such as major wars that affect 
a country’s economy. For this reason, some economists use sulfuric acid production as a 
measure of a country’s industrial strength. Sulfuric acid is used directly or indirectly in nearly 
all industrial processes, including the production of fertilizers, detergents and paints, and in 
ore processing, steel production, and water treatment. Approximately 250 million tonnes of 
sulfuric acid are produced annually across all continents. 
Exercise
Q10. The manufacture of sulfur trioxide can be represented by the equation below:
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g)
∆H= –198 kJ mol–1
What happens when a catalyst is added to an equilibrium mixture from 
this reaction?
A 
The rate of the forward reaction increases and that of the reverse 
reaction decreases.
B 
The rates of both forward and reverse reactions increase.
C 
The value of ∆H increases.
D 
The yield of sulfur trioxide increases.
Q11. What will happen to the position of equilibrium and the value of the 
equilibrium constant when the temperature is increased in the following 
reaction?
Br2(g) + Cl2(g) ⇌ 2BrCl(g) 
∆H = +14 kJ mol–1
Position of equilibrium
Value of equilibrium constant
A
shifts towards the reactants
decreases
B
shifts towards the reactants
increases
C
shifts towards the products
decreases
D
shifts towards the products
increases
Q12. Which changes will shift the position of equilibrium to the right in the 
following reaction?
2CO2(g) ⇌ 2CO(g) + O2(g)
I. 
adding a catalyst
II. decreasing the oxygen concentration
III. increasing the volume of the container
A 
I and II only B 
I and III only 
C 
II and III only 
D 
I, II and III
Q13. For each of the following reactions, predict in which direction the 
equilibrium will shift in response to an increase in pressure:
(a) 2CO2(g) ⇌ 2CO(g) + O2(g)
(b) CO(g) + 2H2 ⇌ CH3OH(g)
(c)
H2(g) + Cl2(g) ⇌ 2HCl(g)
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


451
Q14. How will the equilibrium
CH4(g) + 2H2S(g) ⇌ CS2(g) + 4H2(g)
∆H = +ve
respond to the following changes?
(a) addition of H2(g)
(b) addition of CH4(g)
(c) a decrease in the volume of the container
(d) removal of CS2(g)
(e) increase in temperature
Q15. The reaction
2CO(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2CO2(g) 
∆H = –566 kJ mol–1
takes place in catalytic converters in cars. If this reaction is at equilibrium, 
will the amount of CO increase, decrease or stay the same when:
(a) the pressure is increased by decreasing the volume?
(b) the pressure is increased by adding O2(g)?
(c) the temperature is increased?
(d) a platinum catalyst is added?
Q16. In the Haber process for the synthesis of ammonia, what effects does the 
catalyst have?
Rate of formation of NH3(g)
Amount of NH3(g) formed
A
increases
increases
B
increases
decreases
C
increases
no change
D
no change
increases
Q17. 
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g)
∆H = –200 kJ mol–1
According to the above information, what temperature and pressure 
conditions produce the greatest amount of SO3?
Temperature
Pressure
A
low
low
B
low
high
C
high
high
D
high
low
Q18. Predict how you would expect the value of K for the exothermic Haber 
process to change as the temperature is increased. Explain the signiﬁ cance of 
this in terms of the reaction yield.
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


452
How can the extent of a reversible reaction be influenced?
Guiding Question revisited
In this chapter we have considered the following features of reversible reactions:
• A dynamic equilibrium is reached:
◦in a closed physical or chemical system
◦when the rates of forward and backward reactions are equal and the 
concentrations of reactants and products remain constant.
• The equilibrium constant, K, can be determined from the stoichiometry of a 
reaction and the equilibrium concentrations of reactants and products.
• The magnitude of K indicates the extent of reaction at a given temperature.
• The equilibrium law:
◦states that every reaction will have a particular value of K at a given temperature
◦can be used to quantify the composition of an equilibrium mixture.
• Le Châtelier’s principle can be used to predict changes in equilibrium position 
when a system is subject to changes in concentration, pressure and temperature. 
It states that a system at equilibrium when subjected to a change will respond in such a way 
as to minimize the effect of the change. Therefore:
◦an increase in concentration of reactants will shift the equilibrium towards 
the products and vice versa; K remains unchanged
◦an increase in pressure will shift the equilibrium towards the side of the 
reaction with the least gaseous molecules and vice versa; K remains unchanged
◦an increase in temperature will shift the equilibrium in the endothermic 
direction and vice versa; K changes at different temperatures
◦the use of a catalyst has no effect on the position of equilibrium as it increases 
the forward and backward rate by equal amounts; K remains unchanged.
Practice questions
1. Which statement about chemical equilibria implies they are dynamic?
A 
The position of equilibrium constantly changes.
B 
The rates of forward and backward reactions change.
C 
The reactants and products continue to react.
D 
The concentrations of the reactants and products continue to change.
2.
The reaction below represents the equilibrium established between gaseous 
and aqueous carbon dioxide in a carbonated soft drinks bottle.
CO2(g) ⇌ CO2(aq)
The bottle is opened for a short period of time allowing some CO2(g) to 
escape before the lid is placed back on. What is the effect of this change on 
the position of equilibrium and the concentration of CO2(aq)?
Position of equilibrium
[CO2(aq)]
A
shifts to the left
decreases
B
shifts to the right
increases
C
shifts to the left
increases
D
shifts to the right
decreases
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


453
3. What is the effect of an increase of temperature on the yield and the 
equilibrium constant for the following reaction?
2H2(g) + CO(g) ⇌ CH3OH(l) 
∆H= −128 kJ mol–1
Yield
Equilibrium constant
A
increases
increases
B
increases
decreases
C
decreases
increases
D
decreases
decreases
4. Consider the equilibrium between methanol, CH3OH(l), and methanol vapour, 
CH3OH(g).
CH3OH(l) ⇌ CH3OH(g)
What happens to the position of equilibrium and the value of K as the 
temperature decreases?
Position of equilibrium
Value of K
A
shifts to the left
decreases
B
shifts to the left
increases
C
shifts to the right
decreases
D
shifts to the right
increases
5. An increase in temperature increases the amount of chlorine present in the 
following equilibrium.
PCl5(s) ⇌ PCl3(l) + Cl2(g)
What is the best explanation for this?
A 
The higher temperature increases the rate of the forward reaction only.
B 
The higher temperature increases the rate of the reverse reaction only.
C 
The higher temperature increases the rate of both reactions but the 
forward reaction is affected more than the reverse.
D 
The higher temperature increases the rate of both reactions but the reverse 
reaction is affected more than the forward.
6. Consider the following reversible reaction.
Cr2O72−(aq) + H2O(l) ⇌ 2CrO42−(aq) +2H+(aq)
What will happen to the position of equilibrium and the value of K when more 
H+ ions are added at constant temperature?
Position of equilibrium
Value of K
A
shifts to the left
decreases
B
shifts to the right
increases
C
shifts to the right
does not change
D
shifts to the left
does not change
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


454
7. Consider this equilibrium reaction in a sealed container:
H2O(g) ⇌ H2O(l)
What will be the effect on the equilibrium of increasing the temperature from 
20 °C to 30 °C?
A 
More of the water will be in the gaseous state at equilibrium.
B 
More of the water will be in the liquid state at equilibrium.
C 
At equilibrium the rate of condensation will be greater than the rate of 
evaporation.
D 
At equilibrium the rate of evaporation will be greater than the rate of 
condensation.
8. Which statement is correct for the equilibrium:
H2O(l) ⇌ H2O(g)
in a closed system at 100 °C?
A 
All the H2O(l) molecules have been converted to H2O(g).
B 
The rate of the forward reaction is greater than the rate of the reverse 
reaction.
C 
The rate of the forward reaction is less than the rate of the reverse reaction.
D 
The pressure remains constant.
9. Consider the following equilibrium:
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g) 
∆H = −198 kJ mol–1
(a) Deduce the equilibrium constant expression, K, for the reaction. 
(1)
(b) State and explain the effect of increasing the pressure on the yield of sulfur 
trioxide. 
(2)
(c) State and explain the effect of increasing the temperature on the yield of 
sulfur trioxide. 
(2)
(d) State the effects of a catalyst on the forward and reverse reactions, on the 
position of equilibrium, and on the value of K. 
(3)
(Total 8 marks)
10. The Haber process enables the large-scale production of ammonia needed to 
make fertilizers.
The equation for the Haber process is given below.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g)
The percentage of ammonia in the equilibrium mixture varies with temperature.
percentage of NH3 in
equilibrium mixture
temperature
REACTIVITY 2
How much, how fast and how far?


455
(a) Use the graph to deduce whether the forward reaction is exothermic or 
endothermic  and explain your choice. 
(2)
(b) State and explain the effect of increasing the pressure on the yield of 
ammonia. 
(2)
(c) Deduce the equilibrium constant expression, K, for the reaction. 
(1)
(Total 5 marks)
11. An example of a homogeneous reversible reaction is the reaction between 
hydrogen and iodine.
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g)
(a) Outline the characteristics of a homogeneous chemical system that is in a 
state of equilibrium. 
(2)
(b) Deduce the expression for the equilibrium constant, K. 
(1)
(c) Predict what would happen to the position of equilibrium if the pressure 
was increased from 1 atm to 2 atm. 
(1)
(d) The value of K at 500 K is 160 and the value of K at 700 K is 54. Deduce 
what this information tells us about the enthalpy change of the forward 
reaction. 
(1)
(e) Determine the value of the equilibrium constant, K’, for the reverse 
reaction at 500 K. 
(1)
(f ) The reaction can be catalyzed by adding platinum metal. State and explain 
what effect the addition of platinum would have on the value of the 
equilibrium constant. 
(2)
(Total 8 marks)
REACTIVITY 2.3
How far? The extent of chemical change


What are the 
mechanisms of chemical 
change?
3
REACTIVITY


