551
REACTIVITY 3.3
Electron sharing reactions
Radicals are highly reactive species that contain an unpaired electron. This unpaired 
electron makes radicals energetically unstable so they readily react with other species to 
form products that are energetically more stable. These reactions can involve radicals 
breaking bonds in other compounds or reacting with each other by combining their 
unpaired electrons and forming a covalent bond.
The high reactivity of radicals means they are capable of breaking down compounds 
which would otherwise be stable. This can be beneficial when used in applications such 
as wastewater treatment and the breakdown of persistent pollutants, as well as in the 
industrial production of additional polymers. However the high reactivity of radicals 
can also result in environmentally harmful processes such as smog formation and 
atmospheric ozone depletion. Beneficial reactions involving radicals occur within our 
bodies, including various enzyme reactions and the destruction of pathogens. However, 
radicals can also cause cell damage and have been associated with various illnesses such 
as cancers, strokes and heart disease as well as being identified as a possible cause of the 
ageing process.
Radical reactions occur via a mechanism involving three stages: initiation, propagation 
and termination. In this chapter we will use the substitution of alkanes by halogens as 
a case study to illustrate how stable compounds can react with radicals through this 
mechanism.
Nature of Science
The development of scientific knowledge relies on the ability of scientists to 
obtain empirical evidence that either supports or discredits proposed theories. 
Early chemists, relying on personal observations and/or simple measurements, 
were often only able to postulate or make inferences about the nature of 
reactions being studied and the presence of reactive intermediates. Progressive 
developments in technologies and instrumentation have allowed chemists to 
obtain increasingly detailed empirical evidence, including the detection and 
measurement of previously undetectable species such as radicals. This has led 
to many breakthroughs in our understanding of chemical reactivity.
Reactivity 3.3.1 – Radicals
Reactivity 3.3.1 – A radical is a chemical entity that has an unpaired electron. Radicals 
are highly reactive.
Identify and represent radicals, e.g. •CH3 and Cl•.
Structure 2.1 – How is it possible for a radical 
to be an atom, a molecule, a cation or an 
anion? Consider examples of each type. 
The kayaker’s clothing and equipment, including the kayak, paddle and personal flotation device, are 
made almost entirely of organic compounds that have been artificially synthesized. Organic chemists 
use knowledge of the functional groups in organic molecules to design compounds with the required 
properties such as waterproofing, breathability, strength, density, flexibility and insulation. Addition 
polymers such as polyethene, which the kayak is made of, are synthesized using electron sharing 
reactions involving reactive species called radicals. 
What happens when a species possesses an unpaired electron? 
Guiding Question


552
REACTIVITY 3
What are the mechanisms of chemical change?
Radicals have unpaired electrons and are 
highly reactive 
A radical is a chemical species that contains an unpaired electron. The presence of 
an unpaired electron results in radicals having a high enthalpy. This makes radicals 
very reactive as it is energetically favourable for them to take an electron from other 
species or to combine with other radicals to form a covalent bond, as both can result in 
products with a lower enthalpy.
The free-radical theory of ageing suggests that the physiological changes associated with 
ageing are the result of oxidative reactions in cells causing damage to membranes and large 
molecules such as DNA. These changes accumulate with time and may explain the increase 
in degenerative diseases, such as cancer, with age. The theory suggests that supplying cells 
with antioxidants will help to slow down the damaging oxidative reactions. Antioxidants are 
particularly abundant in fresh fruit and vegetables, as well as in tea and cocoa. Although there 
is strong evidence that antioxidant supplementation may help protect against certain diseases, 
it has not yet been shown to produce a demonstrated increase in the human life span. 
Because they are highly reactive, radicals tend to have short lifetimes and do not 
exist for very long. One notable exception is when radicals are formed in the upper 
atmosphere where they can persist for a significant length of time as there is a low 
probability of them colliding and reacting with other chemical species.
A researcher using electron resonance spectroscopy to examine the role of radicals in anticancer 
drug activity. 
The only formal requirement of a radical is the presence of an unpaired electron. It is 
therefore possible for radicals to be atoms, molecules or ions. Examples of the different 
types of radicals include:
• atomic: chlorine (Cl•), bromine (Br•), hydrogen (H•)
• molecular: neutral molecules with an odd number of electrons will be radicals, 
e.g. nitric oxide (NO•), hydroxyl radical (OH•), methyl radical (•CH3)
• anionic: molecules that gain electrons can become radical anions, e.g. 
superoxide radical (O2•–), benzene radical anion (C6H6•–)
• cationic: molecules that lose electrons can become radical cations, e.g. propane 
cation (C3H8•+), ethanol cation (C2H5OH•+).
Fresh fruits and vegetables are 
good sources of antioxidants, 
which may help prevent 
damaging oxidative reactions 
from occurring in cells.
The free-radical 
theory of ageing is a 
hypothesis that is not 
universally supported. 
Will the explanation 
of certain natural 
processes ever go 
beyond hypotheses? 
The presence of 
radicals in speciﬁ c 
chemical reactions 
was ﬁ rst postulated by 
chemists in the 1900s 
but these radicals 
could not be isolated 
or observed directly. 
The development 
of Electron Spin 
Resonance (ESR) 
spectroscopy in 
the 1940s enabled 
radicals to be detected 
due to the unique 
magnetic properties 
associated with 
unpaired electrons. 
Further advancements 
in ESR and other 
spectroscopic 
techniques combined 
with increased 
computer processing 
power, have 
demonstrated the 
importance of radical 
reactions in many areas 
of chemistry.


553
REACTIVITY 3.3
Electron sharing reactions
The different species given on the previous page are all identified as radicals by 
including a dot (•) in their chemical formulas. This dot represents an unpaired electron 
and is usually aligned vertically with the middle of the chemical formula.
Nature of Science
As chemistry has progressed, the term radical has been applied in different 
contexts. In earlier definitions a radical was described as a group of atoms 
that could exist on its own, or as part of a larger molecule. If the group was to 
exist free of the other atoms in the molecule, this would require the homolytic 
breaking of a covalent bond so a free radical would have an unpaired electron.
In modern contexts, the term functional group (see Structure 3.2) is now used 
instead of radical to describe a specific group of atoms within a molecule, with 
‘radical’ specifically referring to a chemical species that contains an unpaired 
electron. However the term ‘free radical’ is still commonly used. 
Make sure that you 
understand the 
difference between a 
radical and an ion. A 
radical has an unpaired 
electron but no net 
charge; an ion carries 
a charge. Species that 
are radicals and carry 
a charge are known 
as radical cations or 
radical anions. 
Nature of Science
Classification of reactions can be approached in many different ways. For 
example, combustion reactions can be defined as a redox reaction, because 
carbon atoms in the fuel are oxidized to give CO2, or as an electron sharing 
(radical) reaction, because they proceed via a chain reaction involving various 
radical species.
It is estimated that around 50% of the world’s polymers are addition polymers which have 
been made via radical reactions. Two examples of addition polymers are polypropene and 
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), which can be used in 3D printers to create custom 
shapes and designs. At addition polymers are covered in more detail in Structure 2.4. 
3D printing can use addition polymers to make custom shapes and designs.
An unpaired electron 
is represented in a 
chemical formula by 
a dot (•).
Structure 2.1 – How is it 
possible for a radical to 
be an atom, a molecule, 
a cation or an anion? 
Consider examples of 
each type. 
A beach campfire at sunset. 
Combustion reactions, such 
as the burning of wood, 
occur via chain reactions 
of many steps, with radical 
species progressively breaking 
the fuel down into smaller 
compounds, eventually 
forming carbon dioxide, water 
and other simple oxides. 


554
REACTIVITY 3
What are the mechanisms of chemical change?
Exercise
Q1. Which of the following species is a radical?
A 
F 
B 
Cl–
C 
Ne 
D 
Li+
Q2. Which of the following molecules is a radical? 
A 
CO2
B 
NO2
C 
CH4
D 
NH3
Q3. Which of the following ions is a radical?
A 
Cl–
B 
NO3– 
C 
Mg2+
D 
CH4+
Reactivity 3.3.2 – Homolytic ﬁ ssion
Reactivity 3.3.2 – Radicals are produced by homolytic ﬁ ssion, e.g. of halogens, in the 
presence of ultraviolet (UV) light or heat.
Explain, including with equations, the homolytic ﬁ ssion of halogens, known as the initiation 
step in a chain reaction.
The use of a single-barbed arrow (ﬁ sh hook) 
to show the movement of a single electron 
should be covered.
Reactivity 1.2 – Why do chloroﬂ uorocarbons 
(CFCs) in the atmosphere break down to release 
chlorine radicals but not ﬂ uorine radicals?
Structure 2.2 – What is the reverse process of 
homolytic ﬁ ssion?
Structure 2.2 – Chlorine radicals released from 
CFCs are able to break down ozone, O3, but not 
oxygen, O2, in the stratosphere. What does this 
suggest about the relative bond strengths of 
bonds in the two allotropes?
Radicals can be made through the breaking of 
covalent bonds 
When homolytic fission occurs, a covalent bond breaks to form two radicals. ‘Homo’ 
means ‘the same’ and refers to the fact that the two products have an equal assignment 
of electrons from the bond.
As shown in Reactivity 1.2, breaking bonds is an endothermic process, so homolytic 
fission requires energy for it to happen. The amount of energy required depends on 
the strength of the covalent bond. For weaker bonds, sufficient energy can come 
from heating the compound and the process is known as thermolytic fission. The 
breaking of stronger bonds requires the absorption of high-energy UV light and is 
known as photolytic fission.
Thermolytic ﬁ ssion
Heat
X  X 
 X• + X•
Photolytic ﬁ ssion
UV
X  X 
 X• + X•


555
REACTIVITY 3.3
Electron sharing reactions
The Cl–Cl bond in chlorine, Cl2, can be broken through photolytic fission. The 
molecule splits into two chlorine atoms, each has an unpaired electron and both atoms 
are therefore radicals.
Cl
Cl
Cl2
2Cl• radicals
Cl
Cl
2 chlorine radicals
UV light
UV light
This process can also be shown using single-headed curly arrows, sometimes known 
as ‘fish hooks’, to show the movement of a single electron.
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
As we will see later in this chapter, termination reactions occur when two radicals 
combine, sharing their unpaired electrons and forming a covalent bond. This is 
effectively the reverse process of homolytic fission and can also be represented using 
single-headed curly arrows. For example, the termination reaction between CH3• and 
Cl• radicals to form CH3Cl can be represented by:
H3C•   +   •Cl
C3H – Cl
termination
Chlorine radicals can cause ozone depletion 
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were widely used in aerosols, refrigerants, solvents and 
plastics due to their low reactivity and low toxicity in the troposphere. But when CFCs 
enter the stratosphere, the higher energy UV radiation breaks them down, releasing 
chlorine atoms, which are reactive radicals.
In 1985, measurements showed unusually low levels of atmospheric ozone over Antarctica 
and the Southern Ocean. The main culprit for ozone depletion, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 
had been identified as far back as 1974, but efforts to ban CFCs had proved controversial 
due to economic concerns and difficulties in finding alternative substances. The levels of 
depletion observed in 1985 led to urgent action with the Montreal Protocol, which banned 
ozone depleting substances, being adopted in 1987. Global cooperation in adhering to this 
Protocol has stopped the decline in atmospheric ozone levels, with measurements in recent 
years showing signs of a recovery.
The level observed in 2000 was one of the lowest measured, as shown by the large purple 
region in the figure on the left below. The greater amount of blue present in 2020 provides 
evidence that atmospheric ozone levels are now recovering. 
Homolytic fission 
occurs when a bond 
breaks by splitting 
the shared pair of 
electrons between 
the two products. 
It produces two 
radicals, each with an 
unpaired electron:
X  X → X• + X•
Structure 2.2 – What is 
the reverse process of 
homolytic ﬁ ssion? 
Used spray paint cans. 
Before being banned under 
the Montreal Protocol, 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
were used as refrigerants and 
propellants for spray paints, 
deodorant and hair sprays, 
along with other applications. 
Minimum annual ozone 
levels measured over 
Antarctica in September 
2000 (left) and October 2020 
(right). The colours represent 
ozone concentrations and 
follow the progression: purple 
(lowest), blue, green yellow 
(highest). 


556
REACTIVITY 3
What are the mechanisms of chemical change?
Although CFCs contain both C–Cl and C–F bonds, the C–Cl bond has a much lower 
bond enthalpy (324 kJ mol–1) compared to the C–F bond (492 kJ mol–1). When UV 
radiation is absorbed, the weaker C–Cl bond breaks in preference to the C–F bond.
For example, the CFC dichlorodifluoromethane, commonly known as Freon-12, 
undergoes photochemical decomposition as follows:
UV
CCl2F2(g) 
 CClF2•(g) + Cl•(g)
UV
CCl2F2(g) 
CCl2F•(g) + F•(g)
A molecular model of dichlorodifluoromethane (Freon-12), a chemical that was commonly used 
as a refrigerant and aerosol propellant before being banned under the Montreal Protocol.
Cl
Cl
C
F
F
Challenge yourself
1. The average bond enthalpies for the C–Cl and C–F bonds are 324 kJ mol–1 and 
492 kJ mol–1 respectively. Calculate the wavelengths of UV radiation required to 
break C–Cl and C–F bonds.
The chlorine radicals released then catalyze the decomposition of ozone, O3.
Cl•(g) + O3(g) → O2(g) + ClO•(g)
ClO•(g) + O•(g) → O2(g) + Cl•(g)
Here Cl•(g) has acted as a catalyst and the net reaction is:
O3(g) + O•(g) → 2O2(g)
Because it acts as a catalyst and is regenerated in the reaction, one chlorine radical is 
capable of catalyzing the decomposition of many thousands of ozone molecules.
Although they can break down ozone, the chlorine radicals do not readily react with 
oxygen, O2, present in the stratosphere. The O=O double bond in oxygen is stronger 
than the bonds present in ozone, and this makes O2 more resistant to reactions with 
chlorine radicals.
Reactivity 1.2 – Why do 
chloroﬂ uorocarbons 
(CFCs) in the 
atmosphere break 
down to release 
chlorine radicals but not 
ﬂ uorine radicals?
The success of the 
Montreal Protocol 
in banning CFCs 
in order to avoid 
serious environmental 
consequences is often 
compared to the 
current global heating 
crisis. The scientific 
evidence is now 
unequivocal that the 
Earth is warming due 
to human activities, 
and that this will have 
major environmental 
and societal impacts. 
However, this is proving 
to be a much more 
controversial issue 
due to the significant 
political, economic, 
technological and 
social challenges that 
governments, industry 
and individuals all 
face in making the 
significant reductions 
in greenhouse 
gas emissions 
required. How might 
developments in 
scientific knowledge 
trigger political 
controversies or 
controversies in other 
areas of knowledge? 
Structure 2.2 – Chlorine 
radicals released from 
CFCs are able to break 
down ozone, O3, but 
not oxygen, O2, in the 
stratosphere. What does 
this suggest about the 
relative bond strengths 
of bonds in the two 
allotropes?


557
REACTIVITY 3.3
Electron sharing reactions
Nature of Science
Sometimes the unintended consequences of scientific innovation are not 
known until problems have developed on a large scale and are difficult to 
reverse. Many ozone-depleting chemicals are expected to persist in the 
atmosphere for a long time. Other chemicals such as hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs), which replaced CFCs as refrigerants and have high global warming 
potentials, are now being detected in increasing amounts in the atmosphere. 
As a result, the use of HFCs is now also being phased out under the Kigali 
amendment to the Montreal Protocol. 
F. Sherwood Rowland 
and Mario Molina 
were the two scientists 
who first identified that 
CFCs were capable 
of seriously depleting 
atmospheric ozone 
if their industrial use 
continued unabated. 
Abstracts of scientific 
papers summarize the 
results and conclusions, 
often using highly 
specific language aimed 
at other scientists active 
in the field of study. The 
abstract of Rowland 
and Molina’s 1974 
paper in the prestigious 
journal Nature is a good 
example of clarity and 
ability to convey the 
seriousness of their 
results, even to non-
scientists.
‘Chlorofluoromethanes 
are being added to the 
environment in steadily 
increasing amounts. 
These compounds 
are chemically inert 
and may remain in 
the atmosphere for 
40–150 years, and 
concentrations can be 
expected to reach 10 to 
30 times present levels. 
Photodissociation of the 
chlorofluoromethanes in 
the stratosphere produces 
significant amounts of 
chlorine atoms, and 
leads to the destruction 
of atmospheric ozone.’
Does scientific language 
have a primarily 
descriptive, explanatory 
or interpretive function? 
Does the precision of 
the language used in 
the natural sciences 
successfully eliminate all 
ambiguity?
Exercise
Q4. Which of the following reactions involves homolytic ﬁ ssion?
A 
CH4 + Br2 → CH3Br + HBr
B 
Br2 → Br+ + Br–
C 
C + O2 → CO2
D 
HBr → H + Br
Q5. The homolytic ﬁ ssion of a Cl–Cl bond:
A 
is exothermic
B 
forms two ions
C 
always requires heat
D 
is endothermic.
Q6. Use curly arrows to illustrate the homolytic ﬁ ssion of the covalent bond in 
iodine, I2.
Q7. Explain the difference between homolytic ﬁ ssion that occurs thermolytically 
or photolytically.
Reactivity 3.3.3 – Radical substitution reactions 
of alkanes
Reactivity 3.3.3 – Radicals take part in substitution reactions with alkanes, producing 
a mixture of products.
Explain, using equations, the propagation and termination steps in the reactions between 
alkanes and halogens.
Reference should be made to the stability of 
alkanes due to the strengths of the C–C and 
C–H bonds and their essentially non-polar 
nature.
Reactivity 2.2 – Why are alkanes described 
as kinetically stable but thermodynamically 
unstable?


558
REACTIVITY 3
What are the mechanisms of chemical change?
Substitution reactions of alkanes with halogens 
occur via a radical mechanism 
Alkanes contain strong C–C and C–H bonds which take a lot of energy to break. 
Because alkanes are non-polar compounds, they do not attract reactive species such as 
electrophiles and nucleophiles. These two factors contribute to alkanes being relatively 
unreactive compounds.
The low reactivity of alkanes is also explained by the high activation energies that are 
associated with their reactions. At regular temperatures, the reactant molecules lack 
sufficient kinetic energy to overcome the activation energy, and alkanes are therefore 
regarded as being kinetically stable.
Large activation energy.
Alkanes are unreactive
and kinetically stable.
Negative enthalpy change.
Alkanes are thermodynamically
unstable compared to products.
alkanes
reaction coordinate
potential energy
However, as covered in Reactivity 1.2, alkanes do undergo highly exothermic combustion 
reactions. Because the reaction is exothermic, this means that the alkane reactants have a 
higher enthalpy and are thermodynamically unstable compared to the products.
Radical substitution reactions occur via three stages 
As alkanes are saturated molecules, the main type of reaction that they can undergo 
is substitution. This occurs when another reactant, such as a halogen, takes the place 
of a hydrogen atom in the alkane. The products of a substitution reaction between an 
alkane and a halogen will be a halogenoalkane and the hydrogen halide. For example, 
methane, CH4, reacts with chlorine, Cl2, to produce chloromethane, CH3Cl, and 
hydrogen chloride, HCl.
UV light
CH4(g) + Cl2(g) 
 CH3Cl(g) + HCl(g)
The reaction does not take place in the dark as the energy of UV light is necessary to 
break the covalent bond in the chlorine molecule and form chlorine radicals.
Once formed, these radicals will start a chain reaction in which a mixture of products 
including the halogenoalkane is formed. We can describe the reaction as a sequence 
of steps, known as the reaction mechanism, and it occurs via three stages; initiation, 
propagation and termination.
Initiation
The initiation stage involves the formation of the radical species, which can then react 
with the alkane. For the substitution reaction of methane with 
chlorine, the initiation step is the photolytic fission of chlorine:
The high kinetic 
stability of alkanes is 
one reason that they 
have become the 
world’s predominant 
fuel source as they can 
be safely compressed, 
transported and stored 
before use. 
A Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
tanker at sea. LNG is natural 
gas (mainly methane) that 
has been purified and cooled 
to below –162 °C, which 
condenses it into a liquid. In 
liquefied form it only requires 
1/600th the volume of the 
gas so larger amounts can be 
transported in special, highly-
insulated tanks. 
Reactivity 2.2 – Why 
are alkanes described 
as kinetically stable but 
thermodynamically 
unstable?
Bromination of 
hydrocarbons. Full 
details of how to carry 
out this experiment 
with a worksheet are 
available in the eBook.
UV light
Cl2
 2 Cl• 


559
REACTIVITY 3.3
Electron sharing reactions
Propagation
In the propagation stage, the radicals formed in the initiation stage react with other 
species present to form new radicals. There are many possible propagation steps, 
which all allow the reaction to continue. This is why this type of reaction is often called 
a chain reaction.
For example:
Cl• + CH4 →CH3• + HCl
CH3• + Cl2 → CH3Cl + Cl•
CH3Cl + Cl• →CH2Cl• + HCl
CH2Cl• + Cl2 → CH2Cl2 + Cl•
Termination
Termination reactions remove radicals from the mixture when they react with each 
other and pair up their electrons to form a covalent bond. Again there are many 
possible termination steps.
For example:
Cl• + Cl• → Cl2
CH3• + Cl•→ CH3Cl
CH3• + CH3• → C2H6
CH2Cl• + Cl• → CH2Cl2
So the reaction mixture may contain mono- and disubstituted halogenoalkanes, as 
well as HCl and larger alkanes.
As a termination step involves two unpaired electrons combining to form a covalent 
bond, this is, in effect, the reverse process of homolytic fission where a bond is broken 
to give two radicals.
A similar reaction to the example given above, for methane and chlorine, also occurs 
with other alkanes and bromine, Br2. The change in colour from brown to colourless of 
bromine water when it reacts with an alkane occurs only in the presence of UV light, as 
shown in Figure 1. This reaction is sometimes used to 
distinguish between alkanes and alkenes, 
as will be discussed in 
more detail in the 
following chapter.
The reaction of 
methane, CH4, 
with chlorine, Cl2, 
via a free radical 
mechanism involves 
a number of different 
possible propagation 
and termination 
steps resulting in a 
mixture of products.
The primary 
product of interest 
is chloromethane, 
CH3Cl. Focusing on 
the steps that result 
in the formation of 
this product gives a 
simplified version of 
the mechanism:
Initiation:
UV
Cl2
 2Cl•
Propagation:
Cl• + CH4 → CH3• + HCl
Termination:
CH3• + Cl• → CH3Cl
Overall:
CH4(g) + Cl2(g) 
CH3Cl(g) + HCl(g)
UV
hexane C6H14
1
bromine water
in UV light
in dark
bromine water is
decolorized as a
photochemical
reaction occurs
no reaction occurs;
no change in colour
of bromine water
R3.3 Figure 1 The reaction 
between hexane, C6H14, 
and bromine water takes 
place only in the presence 
of UV light.
Alkanes are saturated 
hydrocarbons and 
undergo substitution 
reactions.


560
REACTIVITY 3
What are the mechanisms of chemical change?
Exercise
Q8. 
What are the three stages of a radical mechanism? Use the reaction of 
methane, CH4, with bromine, Br2, to explain your answer, giving relevant 
equations for each stage.
Q9. 
Alkanes react with halogens in the presence of UV light to form 
halogenoalkanes.
(a) Write equations showing the possible steps leading to the formation 
of bromoethane, C2H5Br, when bromine, Br2, and ethane, C2H6, react 
together in UV light.
(b) Explain, using equations, how this reaction also leads to the formation 
of trace amounts of butane, C4H10.
(c) If the reaction is allowed to proceed for a sufﬁ cient length of time, large 
amounts of dibromoethane products can be formed. Draw and name 
the structures of possible dibromoethane products in this reaction.
Q10. State and explain what would be observed during the following experiments 
carried out at room temperature.
(a) Bromine water is added to hexane in a test tube exposed to UV light.
(b) Bromine water is added to hexane in a test tube that is covered in foil.
Q11. Chloroﬂ uorocarbons (CFCs) such as trichloroﬂ uoromethane, CFCl3, are 
ozone-depleting substances.
(a) Explain, using curly arrows, how trichloroﬂ uoromethane reacts with 
UV light to produce chlorine radicals.
(b) Provide chemical equations showing how chlorine radicals catalyze the 
decomposition of ozone, O3.
Guiding Question revisited
What happens when a species possesses an unpaired electron?
In this chapter we have learnt that:
• Radicals are chemical species that contain an unpaired electron and are highly 
reactive.
• Radicals are formed through homolytic fission of covalent bonds.
• Alkanes are kinetically stable but react with halogens, in the presence of UV 
light, through a radical mechanism.
• Radical mechanisms have three stages: initiation, propagation and termination.
• Ozone depletion due to chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) also occurs through a 
radical mechanism.


561
REACTIVITY 3.3
Electron sharing reactions
Practice questions
1. Which reaction occurs via a radical mechanism?
A 
C2H6 + Br2 → C2H5Br + HBr
B 
C2H4 + Br2 → C2H4Br2
C 
C4H9I + OH−→ C4H9OH + I−
D 
(CH3)3CI + H2O → (CH3)3COH + HI
2. Which statement is true about radical mechanisms?
A 
Radical mechanisms involve four stages.
B 
Radicals form spontaneously in the initiation stage.
C 
Radicals react with non-radical species in the termination stage.
D 
Radicals react with other radicals in the termination stage.
3. Under the correct conditions, pentane reacts with bromine to form a number 
of different products. The reaction can be represented by the equation
C5H12 + Br2 → C5H11Br + Y 
(a) Identify the product Y. 
(1)
(b) State the essential condition for this reaction. 
(1)
(c) The reaction takes place through a stepwise mechanism with three 
stages. Give the names of these stages along with one equation for 
each stage. 
(3)
(d) The reaction can form three different products with the formula C5H11Br.
(i) State the relationship between these products. 
(1)
(ii) Draw and name the structures of the three products. 
(3)
(Total 9 marks)
4. Propane, C3H8, reacts with chlorine, Cl2, in the presence of UV light.
(a) State the type of reaction that occurs. 
(1)
(b) Give equations to explain how this reaction occurs through a stepwise 
mechanism. 
(3)
(c) Draw and name two possible monosubstituted products of the 
reaction. 
(2)
(d) Explain why propane is regarded as kinetically stable but 
thermodynamically unstable. 
(2)
(Total 8 marks)
5.
(a) Explain, using equations, how ethane can be converted to 
chloroethane. 
(4)
(b) Identify a possible alkane, other than ethane, that can be found in the 
product mixture. Give an equation that explains the formation of this 
alkane. 
(2)
(Total 6 marks)


Electron-pair sharing 
reactions
3.4
REACTIVITY


